This time it was in the big drawing-room that Hercule Poirot assembled
his audience.
There was amusement rather than tension in the faces that were
turned towards him. Menace had materialised in the shape of
Inspector Morton and Superintendent Parwell. With the police in
charge, questioning, asking for statements, Hercule Poirot, private
detective, lad receded into something closely resembling a joke.
Timothy was not far from voicing the general feeling when he
remarked in an audible sotto voce to his wife:
"Damned little mountebank! Entwhistle must be gaga! - that's all I can
say."
It looked as though Hercule Poirot would have to work hard to make
his proper effect.
He began in a slightly pompous manner.
"For the second time, I announce my departure! This morning I
announced it for the twelve o'clock train. This evening I announce it for
the nine-thirty - immediately, that is, after dinner. I go because there is
nothing more here for me to do."
"Could have told him that all along." Timothy's commentary was still in
evidence. "Never was anything for him to do. The cheek of these
fellows!"
"I came here originally to solve a riddle. The riddle is solved. Let me,
first, go over the various points which were brought to my attention by
the excellent Mr Entwhistle.
"First, Mr Richard Abernethie dies suddenly. Secondly, after his
funeral, his sister Cora Lansquenet says, 'He was murdered, wasn't
he?' Thirdly Mrs Lansquenet is killed. The question is, are those three
things part of a sequence? Let us observe what happens next! Miss
Gilchrist, the dead woman's companion, is taken ill after eating a piece
of wedding cake which contains arsenic. That, then, is the next step in
the sequence.
"Now, as I told you this morning, in the course of my inquiries I have
come across nothing - nothing at all, to substantiate the belief that Mr
Abernethie was poisoned. Equally, I may say, I have found nothing to
prove conclusively that he was not poisoned. But as we proceed,
things become easier. Cora Lansquenet undoubtedly asked that
sensational question at the funeral. Everyone agrees upon that. And
undoubtedly, on the following day, Mrs Lansquenet was murdered - a
hatchet being the instrument employed. Now let us examine the fourth
happening. The local post van driver is strongly of the belief - though
he will not definitely swear to it - that he did not deliver that parcel of
wedding cake in the usual way. And if that is so, then the parcel was
left by hand and though we cannot exclude a 'person unknown' - we
must take particular notice of those people who were actually on the
spot and in a position to put the parcel where it was subsequently
found. Those were: Miss Gilchrist herself, of course; Susan Banks who
came down that day for the inquest; Mr Entwhistle (but yes, we must
consider Mr Entwhistle; he was present, remember, when Cora made
her disquieting remark!) And there were two other people. An old
gentleman who represented himself to be a Mr Guthrie, an art critic,
and a nun or nuns who called early that morning to collect a
subscription.
"Now I decided that I would start on the assumption that the postal van
driver's recollection was correct. Therefore the little group of people
under suspicion must be very carefully studied. Miss Gilchrist did not
benefit in any way by Richard Abernethie's death and in only a very
minute degree by Mrs Lansquenet's - in actual fact the death of the
latter put her out of employment and left her with the possibility of
finding it difficult to get new employment. Also Miss Gilchrist was
taken to hospital definitely suffering from arsenical poisoning.
"Susan Banks did benefit from Richard Abernethie's death, and in a
small degree from Mrs Lansquenet's - though here her motive must
almost certainly have been security. She might have very good reason
to believe that Miss Gilchrist had overheard a conversation between
Cora Lansquenet and her brother which referred to her, and she might
therefore decide that Miss Gilchrist must be eliminated. She herself,
remember, refused to partake of the wedding cake and also suggested
not calling in a doctor until the morning, when Miss Gilchrist was taken
ill in the night.
"Mr Entwhistle did not benefit by either of the deaths - but he had had
considerable control over Mr Abernethie's affairs, and the trust funds,
and there might well be some reason why Richard Abernethie should
not live too long. But - you will say - if it is Mr Entwhistle who was
concerned, why should he come to me?
"And to that I will answer - it is not the first time that a murderer has
been too sure of himself.
"We now come to what I may call the two outsiders. Mr Guthrie and a
nun. If Mr Guthrie is really Mr Guthrie, the art critic, then that clears
him. The same applies to the nun, if she is really a nun. The question is,
are these people themselves, or are they somebody else?
"And I may say that there seems to be a curious - motif - one might call
it - of a nun running through this business. A nun comes to the door of
Mr Timothy Abernethie's house and Miss Gilchrist believes it is the
same nun she has seen at Lychett St Mary. Also a nun, or nuns, called
here the day before Mr Abernethie died..."
George Crossfield murmured, "Three to one, the nun."
Poirot went on:
"So he we have certain pieces of our pattern - the death of Mr
Abernethie, the murder of Cora Lansquenet, the poisoned wedding
cake, the 'motif' of the 'nun.'
"I will add some other features of the case that engaged my attention:
"The visit of an art critic, a smell of oil paint, a picture postcard of
Polflexan harbour, and finally a bouquet of wax flowers standing on
that malachite table where a Chinese vase stands now.
"It was reflecting on these things that led me to the truth - and I am
now about to tell you the truth.
"The first part of it I told you this morning. Richard Abernethie died
suddenly - but there would have been no reason at all to suspect foul
play had it not been for the words uttered by his sister Cora at his
funeral. The whole case for the murder of Richard Abernethie rests
upon those words. As a result of them, you all believed that murder
had taken place, and you believed it, not really because of the words
themselves but because of the character of Cora Lansquenet herself.
For Cora Lansquenet had always been famous for speaking the truth
at awkward moments. So the case for Richard's murder rested not
only upon what Cora had said but upon Cora herself.
"And now I come to the question that I suddenly asked myself: How well did you all know Cora Lansquenet?"
He was silent for a moment, and Susan asked sharply, "What do you
mean?"
Poirot went on:
"Not well at all - that is the answer! The younger generation had never
seen her at all, or if so, only when they were very young children.
There were actually only three people present that day who actually
knew Cora. Lanscombe, the butler, who is old and very blind; Mrs
Timothy Abernethie who had only seen her a few times round about
the date of her own wedding, and Mrs Leo Abernethie who had known
her quite well, but who had not seen her for over twenty years.
"So I said to myself: 'Supposing it was not Cora Lansquenet who came
to the funeral that day?'"
"Do you mean that Aunt Cora - wasn't Aunt Cora?" Susan demanded
incredulously. "Do you mean that it wasn't Aunt Cora who was
murdered, but someone else?"
"No, no, it was Cora Lansquenet who was murdered. But it was not
Cora Lansquenet who came the day before to her brother's funeral.
The woman who came that day came for one purpose only - to exploit,
one may say, the fact that Richard died suddenly. And to create in the
minds of his relations the belief that he had been murdered. Which she
managed to do most successfully!"
"Nonsense! Why? What was the point of it?" Maude spoke bluffly.
"Why? To draw attention away from the other murder. From the
murder of Cora Lansquenet herself. For if Cora says that Richard has
been murdered and the next day she herself is killed, the two deaths
are bound to be at least considered as possible cause and effect. But if
Cora is murdered and her cottage is broken into, and if the apparent
robbery does not convince the police, then they will look - where?
Close at home, will they not? Suspicion will tend to fall on the woman
who shares the house with her."
Miss Gilchrist protested in a tone that was almost bright:
"Oh come - really - Mr Pontarlier - you don't suggest I'd commit a
murder for an amethyst brooch and a few worthless sketches?"
"No," said Poirot. "For a little more than that. There was one of those
sketches, Miss Gilchrist, that represented Polflexan harbour and
which, as Mrs Banks was clever enough to realise, had been copied
from a picture postcard which showed the old pier still in position. But
Mrs Lansquenet painted always from life. I remembered then that Mr
Entwhistle had mentioned there being a smell of oil paint in the cottage
when he first got there. You can paint, can't you, Miss Gilchrist? Your
father was an artist and you know a good deal about pictures.
Supposing that one of the pictures that Cora picked up cheaply at a
sale was a valuable picture. Supposing that she herself did not
recognise it for what it was, but that you did. You knew she was
expecting, very shortly, a visit from an old friend of hers who was a
well-known art critic. Then her brother dies suddenly - and a plan
leaps into your head. Easy to administer a sedative to her in her early
cup of tea that will keep her unconscious for the whole of the day of
the funeral whilst you yourself are playing her part at Enderby. You
know Enderby well from listening to her talk about it. She has talked,
as people do when they get on in life, a great deal about her childhood
days. Easy for you to start off by a remark to old Lanscombe about
meringues and huts which will make him quite sure of your identity in
case he was inclined to doubt. Yes, you used your knowledge of
Enderby well that day, with allusions to this and that, and recalling
memories. None of them suspected you were not Cora. You were
wearing her clothes, slightly padded, and since she wore a false front
of hair, it was easy for you to assume that. Nobody had seen Cora for
twenty years - and in twenty years people change so much that one
often hears the remark: 'I would never have known her!' But
mannerisms are remembered, and Cora had certain very definite
mannerisms, all of which you had practised carefully before the glass.
"And it was there, strangely enough, that you made your first mistake.
You forgot that a mirror image is reversed. When you saw in the glass
the perfect reproduction of Cora's bird-like sidewise tilt of the head,
you didn't realise that it was actually the wrong way round. You saw,
let us say, Cora inclining her head to the right - but you forgot that
actually your own head was inclined to the left to produce that effect in
the glass.
"That was what puzzled and worried Helen Abernethie at the moment
when you made your famous insinuation. Something seemed to her
'wrong.' I realised myself the other night when Rosamund Shane made
an unexpected remark what happens on such an occasion. Everybody
inevitably looks at the speaker. Therefore, when Mrs Leo felt
something was 'wrong,' it must be that something was wrong with
Cora Lansquenet. The other evening, after talk about mirror images
and 'seeing oneself' I think Mrs Leo experimented before a lookingglass. Her own face is not particularly asymmetrical. She probably
thought of Cora, remembered how Cora used to incline her head to the
right, did so, and looked in the glass when, of course, the image
seemed to her 'wrong' and she realised, in a flash, just what had been
wrong on the day of the funeral. She puzzled it out - either Cora had
taken to inclining her head in the opposite direction - most unlikely - or
else Cora had not ben Cora. Neither way seemed to her to make
sense. But she determined to tell Mr Entwhistle of her discovery at
once. Someone who was used to getting up early was already about,
and followed her down, and fearful of what revelations she might be
about to make struck her down with a heavy doorstop."
Poirot paused and added:
"I may as well tell you now, Miss Gilchrist, that Mrs Abernethie's
concussion is not serious. She will soon be able to tell us her own
story."
"I never did anything of the sort," said Miss Gilchrist. "The whole thing
is a wicked lie."
"It was you that day," said Michael Shane suddenly. He had been
studying Miss Gilchrist's face. "I ought to have seen it sooner - I felt in
a vague kind of way I had seen you before somewhere - but of course
one never looks much at -" he stopped.
"No, one doesn't bother to look at a mere companion-help," said Miss
Gilchrist. Her voice shook a little. "A drudge, a domestic drudge!
Almost a servant! But go on, M. Poirot. Go on with this fantastic piece
of nonsense!"
"The suggestion of murder thrown out at the funeral was only the first
step, of course," said Poirot. "You had more in reserve. At any moment
you were prepared to admit to having listened to a conversation
between Richard and his sister. What he actually told her, no doubt,
was the fact that he had not long to live, and that explains a cryptic
phrase in the letter he wrote her after getting home. The 'nun' was
another of your suggestions. The nun - or rather nuns - who called at
the cottage on the day of the inquest suggested to you a mention of a
nun who was 'following you round,' and you used that when you were
anxious to hear what Mrs Timothy was saying to her sister-in-law at
Enderby. And also because you wished to accompany her there and
find out for yourself just how suspicions were going. Actually to poison
yourself, badly but not fatally, with arsenic, is a very old device - and I
may say that it served to awaken Inspector Morton's suspicions of
you."
"But the picture?" said Rosamund. "What kind of a picture was it?"
Poirot slowly unfolded a telegram.
"This morning I rang up Mr Entwhistle, a responsible person, to go to
Stansfield Grange and, acting on authority from Mr Abernethie himself
-" (here Poirot gave a hard stare at Timothy) "to look amongst the
pictures in Miss Gilchrist's room and select the one of Polflexan
Harbour on pretext of having it reframed as a surprise for Miss
Gilchrist. He was to take it back to London and call upon Mr Guthrie
whom I had warned by telegram. The hastily painted sketch of
Polflexan Harbour was removed and the original picture exposed."
He held up the telegram and read:
"Definitely a Vermeer. Guthrie."
Suddenly, with electrifying effect, Miss Gilchrist burst into speech.
"I knew it was a Vermeer. I knew it! She didn't know! Talking about
Rembrandts and Italian Primitives and unable to recognise a Vermeer
when it was under her nose! Always prating about Art - and really
knowing nothing about it! She was a thoroughly stupid woman. Always
maundering on about this place - about Enderby, and what they did
there as children, and about Richard and Timothy and Laura and all
the rest of them. Rolling in money always! Always the best of
everything those children had. You don't know how boring it is
listening to somebody going on about the same things, hour after hour
and day after day. And saying, 'Oh yes, Mrs Lansquenet' and 'Really,
Mrs Lansquenet?' Pretending to be interested. And really bored -
bored - bored... And nothing to look forward to... And then - a Vermeer!
I saw in the papers that a Vermeer sold the other day for over five
thousand pounds!"
"You killed her - in that brutal way - for five thousand pounds?" Susan's
voice was incredulous.
"Five thousand pounds," said Poirot, "would have rented and equipped
a tea-shop..."
Miss Gilchrist turned to him.
"At least," she said. "You do understand. It was the only chance I'd
ever get. I had to have a capital sum." Her voice vibrated with the
force and obsession of her dream. "I was going to call it the Palm Tree.
And have little camels as menu holders. One can occasionally get
quite nice china - export rejects - not that awful white utility stuff. I
meant to start it in some nice neighbourhood where nice people would
come in. I had thought of Rye... Or perhaps Chichester... I'm sure I
could have made a success of it." She paused a minute, then added
musingly, "Oak tables - and little basket chairs with striped red and
white cushions "
For a few moments, the tea-shop that would never be, seemed more
real than the Victorian solidity of the drawing-room at Enderby...
It was Inspector Morton who broke the spell.
Miss Gilchrist turned to him quite politely.
"Oh, certainly," she said. "At once. I don't want to give any trouble, I'm
sure. After all, if I can't have the Palm Tree, nothing really seems to
matter very much..."
She went out of the room with him and Susan said, her voice still
shaken:
"I've never imagined a lady-like murderer. It's horrible..."