‘What really happened?’ Poirot repeated. 

He reached behind him, drew forward a chair and sat down. His manner 
was now friendly—informal. 

‘It is a question, is it not? For the digitoxin was taken—the syringe was 
missing—there was the mark of a hypodermic on Mrs Boynton’s wrist. 

‘It is true that in a few days’ time we shall know definitely—the 
autopsy will tell us—whether Mrs Boynton died of an overdose of digitalis 
or not. But then it may be too late! It would be better to reach the truth 
tonight—while the murderer is here under our hand.’ 

Nadine raised her head sharply. 

‘You mean that you still believe—that one of us—here in this room...’ 
Her voice died away. 

Poirot was slowly nodding to himself. 

‘The truth, that is what I promised Colonel Carbury. And so, having 
cleared our path we are back again where I was earlier in the day, writing 
down a list of printed facts and being faced straightway with two glaring 
inconsistencies.’ 

Colonel Carbury spoke for the first time. ‘Suppose, now, we hear what 
they are?’ he suggested. 

Poirot said with dignity: ‘I am about to tell you. We will take once more 
those first two facts on my list. Mrs Boynton was taking a mixture of 
digitalis and Dr Gerard missed a hypodermic syringe. Take those facts and 
set them against the undeniable fact (with which I was immediately 
confronted) that the Boynton family showed unmistakably guilty reactions. 
It would seem, therefore, certain that one of the Boynton family must have 
committed the crime! And yet, those two facts I mentioned were all against 
the theory. For, you see, to take a concentrated solution of digitalis—that, 
yes, it is a clever idea, because Mrs Boynton was already taking the drug. 
But what would a member of her family do then? Ah, ma foil there was 
only one sensible thing to do. Put the poison into her bottle of medicine. 
That is what anyone, anyone with a grain of sense and who had access to 
the medicine would certainly do! 

‘Sooner or later Mrs Boynton takes a dose and dies—and even if the 
digitalis is discovered in the bottle it may be set down as a mistake of the 
chemist who made it up. Certainly nothing can be proved! 

‘Why, then, the theft of the hypodermic needle? 

‘There can be only two explanations of that—either Dr Gerard 
overlooked the syringe and it was never stolen, or else the syringe was 
taken because the murderer had not got access to the medicine—that is to 
say the murderer was not a member of the Boynton family. Those two first 
facts point overwhelmingly to an outsider as having committed the crime! 

‘I saw that—but I was puzzled, as I say, by the strong evidences of guilt 
displayed by the Boynton family. Was it possible that, in spite of that 
consciousness of guilt, the Boynton family were innocent ? I set out to prove 
—not the guilt—but the innocence of those people! 

‘That is where we stand now. The murder was committed by an outsider 
—that is, by someone who was not sufficiently intimate with Mrs Boynton to 
enter her tent or to handle her medicine bottle .’ 

He paused. 

‘There are three people in this room who are, technically, outsiders, but 
who have a definite connection with the case.

‘Mr Cope, whom we will consider first, has been closely associated 
with the Boynton family for some time. Can we discover motive and 
opportunity on his part? It seems not. Mrs Boynton’s death has affected him 
adversely—since it has brought about the frustration of certain hopes. 

Unless Mr Cope’s motive was an almost fanatical desire to benefit others, 
we can find no reason for his desiring Mrs Boynton’s death. (Unless, of 
course, there is a motive about which we are entirely in the dark. We do not 
know what Mr Cope’s dealings with the Boynton family have been.)’ 

Mr Cope said with dignity: ‘This seems to me a little farfetched, M. 
Poirot. You must remember I had absolutely no opportunity for committing 
this deed and, in any case I hold very strong views as to the sanctity of 
human life.’ 

‘Your position certainly seems impeccable,’ said Poirot with gravity. ‘In 
a work of fiction you would be strongly suspected on that account.’ 

He turned a little in his chair. ‘We now come to Miss King. Miss King 
had a certain amount of motive and she had the necessary medical 
knowledge and is a person of character and determination, but since she left 
the camp before three-thirty with the others and did not return to it until six 
o’clock, it seems difficult to see where she could have got her opportunity. 

‘Next we must consider Dr Gerard. Now here we must take into account 
the actual time that the murder was committed. According to Mr Lennox 
Boynton’s last statement, his mother was dead at four thirty-five. According 
to Lady Westholme and Miss Pierce, she was alive at four-sixteen when 
they started on their walk. That leaves exactly twenty minutes unaccounted 
for. Now, as these two ladies walked away from the camp, Dr Gerard 
passed them going to it. There is no one to say what Dr Gerard’s 
movements were when he reached the camp because the two ladies’ backs 
were towards it. They were walking away from it. Therefore it is perfectly 
possible for Dr Gerard to have committed the crime. Being a doctor, he 
could easily counterfeit the appearance of malaria. There is, I should say, a 
possible motive. Dr Gerard might have wished to save a certain person 
whose reason (perhaps more vital a loss than loss of life) was in danger, and 
he may have considered the sacrifice of an old and worn-out life worth it!’ 

‘Your ideas,’ said Dr Gerard, ‘are fantastic!’ 

Without taking any notice, Poirot went on: 

‘But if so, why did Gerard call attention to the possibility of foul play? 
It is quite certain that, but for his statement to Colonel Carbury, Mrs 
Boynton’s death would have been put down to natural causes. It was Dr 
Gerard who first pointed out the possibility of murder. That, my friends,’ 
said Poirot, ‘does not make common sense!’ 

‘Doesn’t seem to,’ said Colonel Carbury gruffly. 

‘There is one more possibility,’ said Poirot. ‘Mrs Lennox Boynton just 
now negatived strongly the possibility of her young sister-in-law being 
guilty. The force of her objection lay in the fact that she knew her mother- 
in-law to be dead at the time. But remember this, Ginevra Boynton was at 
the camp all the afternoon. And there was a moment—a moment when 
Lady Westholme and Miss Pierce were walking away from the camp and 
before Dr Gerard had returned to it...’ 

Ginevra stirred. She leaned forward, staring into Poirot’s face with a 
strange, innocent, puzzled stare. 

‘I did it? You think I did it?’ 

Then suddenly, with a movement of swift incomparable beauty, she was 
up from her chair and had flung herself across the room and down on her 
knees beside Dr Gerard, clinging to him, gazing up passionately into his 
face. 

‘No, no, don’t let them say it! They’re making the walls close round me 
again! It’s not true! I never did anything! They are my enemies—they want 
to put me in prison—to shut me up. You must help me. You must help me!’ 

‘There, there, my child.’ Gently the doctor patted her head. Then he 
addressed Poirot. 

‘What you say is nonsense—absurd.’ 

‘Delusions of persecution?’ murmured Poirot. 

‘Yes; but she could never have done it that way. She would have done it, 
you must perceive, dramatically —a dagger—something flamboyant— 
spectacular—never this cool, calm logic! I tell you, my friends, it is so. This 
was a reasoned crime—a sane crime.’ 

Poirot smiled. Unexpectedly he bowed. ‘Je suis entierement de votre 
avis,’ he said smoothly.

‘Come,’ said Hercule Poirot. ‘We have still a little way to go! Dr Gerard has 
invoked the psychology. So let us now examine the psychological side of 
this case. We have taken the facts, we have established a chronological 
sequence of events, we have heard the evidence. There remains—the 
psychology. And the most important psychological evidence concerns the 
dead woman—it is the psychology of Mrs Boynton herself that is the most 
important thing in this case. 

‘Take from my list of specified facts points three and four. Mrs Boynton 
took definite pleasure in keeping her family from enjoying themselves with 
other people. Mrs Boynton, on the afternoon in question, encouraged her 
family to go away and leave her. 

‘These two facts, they contradict each other flatly! Why, on this 
particular afternoon, should Mrs Boynton suddenly display a complete 
reversal of her usual policy? Was it that she felt a sudden warmth of the 
heart—an instinct of benevolence? That, it seems to me from all I have 
heard, was extremely unlikely! Yet there must have been a reason. What 
was that reason? 

‘Let us examine closely the character of Mrs Boynton. There have been 
many different accounts of her. She was a tyrannical old martinet—she was 
a mental sadist—she was an incarnation of evil—she was crazy. Which of 
these views is the true one? 

‘I think myself that Sarah King came nearest to the truth when in a flash 
of inspiration in Jerusalem she saw the old lady as intensely pathetic. But 
not only pathetic —futile.

‘Let us, if we can, think ourselves into the mental condition of Mrs 
Boynton. A human creature born with immense ambition, with a yearning 
to dominate and to impress her personality on other people. She neither 
sublimated that intense craving for power—nor did she seek to master it— 
no, mesdames and messieurs—she fed it! But in the end—listen well to this 
—in the end what did it amount to? She was not a great power! She was not 
feared and hated over a wide area! She was the petty tyrant of one isolated 
family! And as Dr Gerard said to me—she became bored like any other old 
lady with her hobby and she sought to extend her activities and to amuse 
herself by making her dominance more precarious! But that led to an 
entirely different aspect of the case! By coming abroad, she realized for the 
first time how extremely insignificant she was! 

‘And now we come directly to point number ten—the words spoken to 
Sarah King in Jerusalem. Sarah King, you see, had put her finger on the 
truth. She had revealed fully and uncompromisingly the pitiful futility of 
Mrs Boynton’s scheme of existence! And now listen very carefully—all of 
you—to what her exact words to Miss King were. Miss King has said that 
Mrs Boynton spoke “so malevolently—not even looking at me." And this is 
what she actually said: “I’ve never forgotten anything—not an action, not a 
name, not a face.” 

‘Those words made a great impression on Miss King. Their 
extraordinary intensity and the loud hoarse tone in which they were uttered! 
So strong was the impression that they left on her mind that I think she 
quite failed to realize their extraordinary significance! 

‘Do you see that significance, any of you?’ He waited a minute. ‘It 
seems not. But, mes amis, does it escape you that those words were not a 
reasonable answer at all to what Miss King had just been saying? “I’ve 
never forgotten anything—not an action, not a name, not a face.” It does 
not make sense! If she had said, “I never forget impertinence”—something 
of that kind—but no— a face is what she said... 

‘Ah!’ cried Poirot, beating his hands together. ‘But it leaps to the eye! 
Those words, ostensibly spoken to Miss King, were not meant for Miss 
King at all! They were addressed to someone else standing behind Miss 
King.’ 

He paused, noting their expressions. 

‘Yes, it leaps to the eye! That was, I tell you, a psychological moment in 
Mrs Boynton’s life! She had been exposed to herself by an intelligent young 
woman! She was full of baffled fury—and at that moment she recognized 
someone—a face from the past—a victim delivered into her hands! 

‘We are back, you see, at the outsider! And now the meaning of Mrs 
Boynton’s unexpected amiability on the afternoon of her death is clear. She 
wanted to get rid of her family because —to use a vulgarity— she had other 
fish to fry! She wanted the field left clear for an interview with a new 
victim... 

‘Now, from that new standpoint, let us consider the events of the 
afternoon! The Boynton family go off. Mrs Boynton sits up by her cave. 
Now let us consider very carefully the evidence of Lady Westholme and 
Miss Pierce. The latter is an unreliable witness, she is unobservant and very 
suggestible. Lady Westholme, on the other hand, is perfectly clear as to her 
facts and meticulously observant. Both ladies agree on one fact! An Arab, 
one of the servants, approaches Mrs Boynton, angers her in some way and 
retires hastily. Lady Westholme stated definitely that the servant had first 
been into the tent occupied by Ginevra Boynton, but you may remember 
that Dr Gerard's tent was next door to Ginevra’s. It is possible that it was 
Dr Gerard’s tent the Arab entered...’ 

Colonel Carbury said: ‘D’you mean to tell me that one of those Bedouin 
fellows of mine murdered an old lady by sticking her with a hypodermic? 
Fantastic!’ 

‘Wait, Colonel Carbury, I have not yet finished. Let us agree that the 
Arab might have come from Dr Gerard’s tent and not Ginevra Boynton’s. 
What is the next thing? Both ladies agree that they could not see his face 
clearly enough to identify him and that they did not hear what was said. 

That is understandable. The distance between the marquee and the ledge 
was about two hundred yards. Lady Westholme gave a clear description of 
the man otherwise, describing in detail his ragged breeches and the 
untidiness with which his puttees were rolled.’

Poirot leaned forward. 

‘And that, my friends, was very odd indeed! Because if she could not 
see his face or hear what was said, she could not possibly have noticed the 
state of his breeches and puttees! Not at two hundred yards! 

‘It was an error, that, you see! It suggested a curious idea to me. Why 
insist so on the ragged breeches and untidy puttees? Could it be because the 
breeches were not torn and the puttees were non-existent? Lady Westholme 
and Miss Pierce both saw the man—but from where they were sitting they 
could not see each other. That is shown by the fact that Lady Westholme 
came to see if Miss Pierce was awake and found her sitting in the entrance 
of her tent.’ 

‘Good lord,’ said Colonel Carbury, suddenly sitting up very straight. 
‘Are you suggesting—?’ 

‘I am suggesting that, having ascertained just what Miss Pierce (the 
only witness likely to be awake) was doing, Lady Westholme returned to 
her tent, put on her riding breeches, boots and khaki-coloured coat, made 
herself an Arab head-dress with her checked duster and a skein of knitting- 
wool and that, thus attired, she went boldly up to Dr Gerard’s tent, looked in 
his medicine chest, selected a suitable drug, took the hypodermic, filled it 
and went boldly up to her victim. 

‘Mrs Boynton may have been dozing. Lady Westholme was quick. She 
caught her by the wrist and injected the stuff. Mrs Boynton half cried out— 
tried to rise—then sank back. The “Arab” hurried away with every evidence 
of being ashamed and abashed. Mrs Boynton shook her stick, tried to rise, 
then fell back into her chair. 

‘Five minutes later Lady Westholme rejoins Miss Pierce and comments 
on the scene she has just witnessed, impressing her own version of it on the 
other. Then they go for a walk, pausing below the ledge where Lady 
Westholme shouts up to the old lady. She receives no answer. Mrs Boynton 
is dead—but she remarks to Miss Pierce, “Very rude just to snort at us like 
that!” Miss Pierce accepts the suggestion—she has often heard Mrs 
Boynton receive a remark with a snort—she will swear quite sincerely if 
necessary that she actually heard it. Lady Westholme has sat on committees 
often enough with women of Miss Pierce’s type to know exactly how her 
own eminence and masterful personality can influence them. The only point 
where her plan went astray was the replacing of the syringe. Dr Gerard 
returning so soon upset her scheme. She hoped he might not have noticed 
its absence, or might think he had overlooked it, and she put it back during 
the night.’ 

He stopped. 

Sarah said: ‘But why? Why should Lady Westholme want to kill old 
Mrs Boynton?’ 

‘Did you not tell me that Lady Westholme had been quite near you in 
Jerusalem when you spoke to Mrs Boynton? It was to Lady Westholme that 
Mrs Boynton’s words were addressed. “I’ve never forgotten anything—not 
an action, not a name, not a face.” Put that with the fact that Mrs Boynton 
had been a wardress in a prison and you can get a very shrewd idea of the 
truth. Lord Westholme met his wife on a voyage back from America. Lady 
Westholme before her marriage had been a criminal and had served a prison 
sentence. 

‘You see the terrible dilemma she was in? Her career, her ambitions, her 
social position—all at stake! What the crime was for which she served a 
sentence in prison we do not yet know (though we soon shall), but it must 
have been one that would effectually blast her political career if it was made 
public. And remember this, Mrs Boynton was not an ordinary blackmailer. 
She did not want money. She wanted the pleasure of torturing her victim for 
a while and then she would have enjoyed revealing the truth in the most 
spectacular fashion! No, while Mrs Boynton lived. Lady Westholme was 
not safe. She obeyed Mrs Boynton’s instructions to meet her at Petra (I 
thought it strange all along that a woman with such a sense of her own 
importance as Lady Westholme should have preferred to travel as a mere 
tourist), but in her own mind she was doubtless revolving ways and means 
of murder. She saw her chance and carried it out boldly. She only made two 
slips. One was to say a little too much—the description of the torn breeches 
—which first drew my attention to her, and the other was when she mistook 
Dr Gerard’s tent and looked first into the one where Ginevra was lying half 
asleep. Hence the girl’s story—half make-believe, half true—of a sheikh in 
disguise. She put it the wrong way round, obeying her instinct to distort the 
truth by making it more dramatic, but the indication was quite significant 
enough for me.’ 

He paused. 

‘But we shall soon know. I obtained Lady Westholme’s fingerprints 
today without her being aware of the fact. If these are sent to the prison 
where Mrs Boynton was once a wardress, we shall soon know the truth 
when they are compared with the files.’