
‘Richetti is your man,’ Poirot said, ‘but he did not kill Linnet 
Doyle. I have half of the proof I need to point to her murderer, 
but I must wait for the other half.’ 

‘But aren't you going to tell us?’ cried Cornelia. 

‘Mais oui ,’ he said, ‘I like an audience. I like to say, “See how 
clever Hercule Poirot is!”’ 

‘Well,’ said Race gently, ‘how clever is Hercule Poirot?’ 

‘At first I was very stupid. I could not understand why 
Jacqueline de Bellefort’s pistol had been taken away from the 
scene of the crime. Finally, I understood. The murderer took 
it away because he had to take it away — because he had not 
finished with it.’ 

Poirot leaned towards Race. ‘You and I, my friend, decided 
that Linnet Doyle’s murderer had seen a chance and had acted 
without much planning, knowing that everyone would blame 
Jacqueline de Bellefort for the murder after what had happened 
between her and Simon Doyle. 

‘But if that idea is wrong, the whole case changes. Every 
detail of the crime - even putting a strong sleeping drug in my 
wine — was very carefully planned and accurately timed long 
before the Karnak began its journey up the Nile. 

‘My first clue was when the pistol, wrapped in Miss Van 
Schuyler’s shawl, was pulled from the Nile. If the murderer 
wanted to point the finger at Mademoiselle de Bellefort, he had 
to leave the pistol in Madame Doyle’s cabin.’ 

Poirot turned towards Dr Bessner. ‘You, Dr Bessner, told us 
that the skin around the bullet hole on Linnet Doyle’s head was 
burned and black. But this would not have happened if the pistol 
had been wrapped in a shawl. 

‘But a bullet from the pistol had been fired through the shawl. 
Jacqueline certainly did not use the shawl when she fired the pistol 
at Simon. It appeared, therefore, that a third shot had been fired 
- one we knew nothing about. That was difficult to explain. 

‘Then in Linnet Doyle’s cabin I found two nail polish bottles, 
but when I smelled the contents, I found that one contained 
nail polish and the other contained red ink. It suggested a 
connection with the handkerchief with the pink stain, which 
had been wrapped round the pistol. Red ink washes out quickly 
but always leaves a pale pink stain. 

‘And the picture became even clearer when Louise Bourget was murdered. This morning I asked her if she had seen 
anything the previous night. Her answer was unusually long 
and complicated. What did that tell us?’ 

‘That she had climbed the stairs,’ suggested Race. 

‘No, it told me that she was sending a message to someone in 
the room. I knew that the message was not for me or you, Race, 
so it had to be for Dr Bessner or for Simon Doyle. Mademoiselle 
Bourget could easily speak to you, Dr Bessner, in private, but 
this was the only time she could speak to Monsieur Doyle. She 
wanted him to understand her message and to tell her not to 
worry — and he did.’ 

‘But Mr Doyle wasn’t in Mrs Doyle’s cabin. It was impossible 
for him to leave the lounge with the wound to his leg,' said 
Dr Bessner. 

‘Impossible, I know, but he did. It was the only logical meaning 
to Louise Bourget’s words. Then I remembered that there had 
been five minutes when Simon was alone in the lounge before 
Dr Bessner arrived. During that time, what do we know about 
Simon Doyle’s injury? 

‘Two people see Mademoiselle de Bellefort fire her pistol. 
They also see Simon Doyle fall across a chair and put a 
handkerchief against his leg. The handkerchief turns red. Then 
Mr Doyle insists that Mademoiselle Robson takes Mademoiselle 
de Bellefort to her cabin, and he asks Fanthorp to Find Dr 
Bessner. When he is alone, Simon acts quickly. He picks up the 
pistol from under the sofa, takes off his shoes, runs to his wife’s 
cabin, shoots her in the head, leaves the bottle with red ink 
beside her bottle of nail polish, runs back to the lounge, picks 
up Mademoiselle Van Schuyler’s shawl, which he has hidden in 
his chair, wraps it around the pistol and shoots himself in the 
leg. He falls into the chair near a window and throws the pistol 
— wrapped in the handkerchief and the shawl — into the Nile.’ 

‘Impossible!’ said Race. 

‘Not impossible. Remember that Tim Allerton heard a pop 
— followed by a splash. And he heard the sound of a man running 
past his door. It was Simon Doyle running past his cabin.’ 

Race objected, ‘It’s impossible. Doyle couldn’t think that 
quickly. He hasn’t got the brains for it.’ 

‘But he has the body for quick actions - someone else did 
the thinking for him. It was a very cleverly planned piece of 
work. It could not be by chance that Simon Doyle had a bottle 
of red ink in his pocket. It was not chance that Jacqueline de 
Bellefort’s foot kicked the pistol under the sofa, where it would 
be forgotten until later.’ 

‘Jacqueline?’ 

‘Certainly. The two halves of the murder. The shot fired 
by Jacqueline gave Simon his alibi. Simon’s insistence that she 
should not be left alone gave Jacqueline hers. Her brains — his 
speed and timing. 

‘If you realise that they are still lovers, it is all clear. Simon 
goes away with his rich wife, kills her, gets her money and after 
a certain amount of time, marries his true love. 

‘Everything was part of their plan. Jacqueline following 
the new couple. Simon’s pretended anger. And he was too 
affectionate towards his wife in public - not like an ordinary 
Englishman. And when Jacqueline told me that someone was 
in the shadows, listening to our conversation, there was no one! 
Then one night on this boat, I heard Simon’s voice outside my 
cabin. He was saying, “We’ve got to go on with it now.” It was 
Doyle, but he was speaking to Jacqueline, not to Linnet. 

‘The final scene was perfectly planned and timed. There was 
a sleeping drug in my wine. There were honest witnesses to 
see Jacqueline shoot Simon. Then, when the doctor arrived, he 
really had been shot. 

‘But then the plan goes wrong. Louise Bourget has been 
unable to sleep. She comes up the stairs and sees Simon Doyle 
enter his wife’s cabin and come out again. She understands what 
has happened when she sees the dead Madame Doyle the next 
morning. She asks for money. She knows everything, so she 
cannot live.’ 

‘But it would be impossible for Simon Doyle to kill her ,’ 
Cornelia objected. 

‘Yes, but Simon asked to see Jacqueline and wanted to speak 
to her alone. He told her about this new danger, so Jacqueline 
killed Louise Bourget with one of Dr Bessner’s knives before 
lunch and returned the knife before Dr Bessner noticed. 

‘Then, when Madame Otterbourne tried to tell us that she 
had seen Jacqueline on the lower deck, Simon shouted at her 
- he was warning Jacqueline. She remembered Pennington’s 
talk about a pistol, ran to his room, found the gun and shot 
Madame Otterbourne. She was very quick and her cabin was 
only two doors from Dr Bessner’s, so she did not go to the left 
or the right, or up or down. She simply dropped the gun and 
ran into her own cabin, appearing when everyone rushed out to 
see what had happened.’ 

There was a silence and then Race asked, ‘What happened to 
the first bullet fired at Doyle by the girl?’ 

‘I think it went into the table and Doyle removed it when he 
was alone and threw it out of the window. He had, of course, 
an extra bullet, so that it would appear that only two shots had 
been fired.’ 

Cornelia said, ‘They thought of everything. It’s - horrible!’ 

Poirot was silent. His eyes seemed to be saying, ‘You are 
wrong. They did not take into consideration Hercule Poirot.’
