“No, no. We are only going to discuss some events that happened long 
ago—to discuss them and, perhaps, to see more clearly the course of them. 
As to the ghosts, they will not materialize, but who is to say they are not 
here, in this room, although we cannot see them. Who is to say that Amyas 
and Caroline Crale are not here—listening?” 

Philip Blake said: “Absurd nonsense—” and broke off as the door 
opened again and the butler announced Lady Dittisham. 

Elsa Dittisham came in with that faint, bored insolence that was a 
characteristic of her. She gave Meredith a slight smile, stared coldly at 
Angela and Philip, and went over to a chair by the window a little apart 
from the others. She loosened the rich pale furs round her neck and let them 
fall back. She looked for a minute or two about the room, then at Carla, and 
the girl stared back, thoughtfully appraising the woman who had wrought 
the havoc in her parents’ lives. There was no animosity in her young earnest 
face, only curiosity. 

Elsa said: “I am sorry if I am late, Mr. Poirot.” 

“Tt was very good of you to come, madame.” 

Cecilia Williams snorted ever so slightly. Elsa met the animosity in her 
eyes with a complete lack of interest. She said: 

“T wouldn’t have known you, Angela. How long is it? Sixteen years?” 

Hercule Poirot seized his opportunity. 

“Yes, it is sixteen years since the events of which we are to speak, but 
let me first tell you why we are here.” 

And in a few simple words he outlined Carla’s appeal to him and his 
acceptance of the task. 

He went on quickly, ignoring the gathering storm visible on Philip’s 
face, and the shocked distaste on Meredith’s. 

“I accepted that commision——I set to work to find out the truth.” 

Carla Lemarchant, in the big grandfather chair, heard Poirot’s words 
dimly, from a distance. 

With her hand shielding her eyes she studied five faces, surreptitiously. 
Could she see any of these people committing murder? The exotic Elsa, the 
red-faced Philip, dear, nice, kind Mr. Meredith Blake, that grim tartar of a 
governess, the cool, competent Angela Warren? 

Could she—if she tried hard—visualize one of them killing someone? 
Yes, perhaps—but it wouldn’t be the right kind of murder. She could picture 
Philip Blake, in an outburst of fury, strangling some women—yes, she 
could picture that...And she could picture Meredith Blake, threatening a 
burglar with a revolver—and letting it off by accident. And she could 
picture Angela Warren, also firing a revolver, but not by accident. With no 
personal feeling in the matter—the safety of the expedition depended on it! 
And Elsa, in some fantastic castle, saying from her couch of oriental silks: 
“Throw the wretch over the battlements!” All wild fancies—and not even in 
the wildest flight of fancy could she imagine little Miss Williams killing 
anybody at all! Another fantastic picture: “Did you ever kill anybody, Miss 
Williams?” “Go on with your arithmetic, Carla, and don’t ask silly 
questions. To kill anybody is very wicked.” 

Carla thought: “I must be ill—and I must stop this. Listen, you fool, 
listen to that little man who says he knows.” 

Hercule Poirot was talking. 

“That was my task—to put myself in reverse gear, as it were, and go 
back through the years and discover what really happened.” 

Philip Blake said: “We all know what happened. To pretend anything 
else is a swindle—that’s what it is, a bare-faced swindle. You’re getting 
money out of this girl on false pretences.” 

Poirot did not allow himself to be angered. He said: 

“You say, we all know what happened. You speak without reflection. 
The accepted version of certain facts is not necessarily the true one. On the 
face of it, for instance, you, Mr. Blake, disliked Caroline Crale. That is the 
accepted version of your attitude. But anyone with the least flair for 

psychology can perceive at once that the exact opposite was the truth. You 
were always violently attracted towards Caroline Crale. You resented the 
fact, and tried to conquer it by steadfastly telling yourself her defects and 
reiterating your dislike. In the same way, Mr. Meredith Blake had a tradition 
of devotion to Caroline Crale lasting over many years. In his story of the 
tragedy he represents himself as resenting Amyas Crale’s conduct on her 
account, but you have only to read carefully between the lines and you will 
see that the devotion of a lifetime had worn itself thin and that it was the 
young, beautiful Elsa Greer that was occupying his mind and thoughts.” 

There was a splutter from Meredith, and Lady Dittisham smiled. 

Poirot went on. 

“T mention these matters only as illustrations, though they have their 
bearing on what happened. Very well, then, I start on my backward journey 
—to learn everything I can about the tragedy. I will tell you how I set about 
it. I talked to the Counsel who defended Caroline Crale, to the Junior 
Counsel for the Crown, to the old solicitor who had known the Crale family 
intimately, to the lawyer’s clerk who had been in court during the trial, to 
the police officer in charge of the case—and I came finally to the five 
eyewitnesses who had been upon the scene. And from all of these I put 
together a picture—a composite picture of a woman. And I learned these 
facts: 

“That at no time did Caroline Crale protest her innocence (except in 
that one letter written to her daughter). 

“That Caroline Crale showed no fear in the dock, that she showed, in 
fact, hardly any interest, that she adopted throughout a thoroughly defeatist 
attitude. That in prison she was quiet and serene. That in a letter she wrote 
to her sister immediately after the verdict, she expressed herself as 
acquiescent in the fate that had overtaken her. And in the opinion of 
everyone I talked to (with one notable exception) Caroline Crale was 
guilty.” 

Philip Blake nodded his head. “Of course she was!” 

Hercule Poirot said: 

“But it was not my part to accept the verdict of others. I had to examine 
the evidence for myself. To examine the facts and to satisfy myself that the 
psychology of the case accorded itself with them. To do this I went over the 
police files carefully, and I also succeeded in getting five people who were 
on the spot to write me out their own accounts of the tragedy. These accounts were very valuable for they contained certain matter which the 
police files could not give me—that is to say: A, certain conversations and 
incidents which, from the police point of view, were not relevant; B, the 
opinions of the people themselves as to what Caroline Crale was thinking 
and feeling (not admissible legally as evidence); C, certain facts which had 
been deliberately withheld from the police. 

“I was in a position now to judge the case for myself. There seems no 
doubt whatever that Caroline Crale had ample motive for the crime. She 
loved her husband, he had publicly admitted that he was about to leave her 
for another woman, and by her own admission she was a jealous woman. 

“To come from motives to means, an empty scent bottle that had 
contained coniine was found in her bureau drawer. There were no 
fingerprints upon it but hers. When asked about it by the police, she 
admitted taking it from this room we are in now. The coniine bottle here 
also had her fingerprints upon it. I questioned Mr. Meredith Blake as to the 
order in which the five people left this room on that day—for it seemed to 
me hardly conceivable that anyone should be able to help themselves to the 
poison whilst five people were in the room. The people left the room in this 
order—Elsa Greer, Meredith Blake, Angela Warren and Philip Blake, 
Amyas Crale, and lastly Caroline Crale. Moreover, Mr. Meredith Blake has 
his back to the room whilst he was waiting for Mrs. Crale to come out, so 
that it was impossible for him to see what she was doing. She had, that is to 
say, the opportunity. I am therefore satisfied that she did take the coniine. 
There is indirect confirmation of it. Mr. Meredith Blake said to me the other 
day: “I can remember standing here and smelling the jasmine through the 
open window.” But the month was September, and the jasmine creeper 
outside that window would have finished flowering. It is the ordinary 
jasmine which blooms in June and July. But the scent bottle found in her 
room and which contained the dregs of coniine had originally contained 
jasmine scent. I take it as certain, then, that Mrs. Crale decided to steal the 
coniine, and surreptitiously emptied out the scent from a bottle she had in 
her bag. 

“I tested that a second time the other day when I asked Mr. Blake to 
shut his eyes and try and remember the order of leaving the room. A whiff 
of jasmine scent stimulated his memory immediately. We are all more 
influenced by smell than we know. 

“So we come to the morning of the fatal day. So far the facts are not in 
dispute. Miss Greer’s sudden revealing of the fact that she and Mr. Crale 
contemplate marriage, Amyas Crale’s confirmation of that, and Caroline 
Crale’s deep distress. None of these things depend on the evidence of one 
witness only. 

“On the following morning there is a scene between husband and wife 
in the library. The first thing that is overheard is Caroline Crale saying: 
“You and your women!” in a bitter voice, and finally going on to say, 
“Some day I’ll kill you.” Philip Blake overheard this from the hall. And 
Miss Greer overheard it from the terrace outside. 

“She then heard Mr. Crale ask his wife to be reasonable. And she heard 
Mrs. Crale say: “Sooner than let you go to that girl—I’ I kill you.” Soon 
after this Amyas Crale comes out and brusquely tells Elsa Greer to come 
down and pose for him. She gets a pullover and accompanies him. 

“There is nothing so far that seems psychologically incorrect. Every one 
has behaved as they might be expected to behave. But we come now to 
something that is incongruous. 

“Meredith Blake discovers his loss, telephones his brother; they meet 
down at the landing stage and they come up past the Battery garden, where 
Caroline Crale is having a discussion with her husband on the subject of 
Angela’s going to school. Now that does strike me as very odd. Husband 
and wife have a terrific scene, ending in a distinct threat on Caroline’s part, 
and yet, twenty minutes or so later, she goes down and starts a trivial 
domestic argument.” 

Poirot turned to Meredith Blake. 

“You speak in your narrative of certain words you overheard Crale say. 
These were: ‘It’s all settled—tI’ll see to her packing.’ That is right?” 

Meredith Blake said: “It was something like that—yes.” 

Poirot turned to Philip Blake. 

“Is your recollection the same?” 

The latter frowned. 

“I didn’t remember it till you say so—but I do remember now. 
Something was said about packing!” 

“Said by Mr. Crale—not Mrs. Crale?” 

“Amyas said it. All I heard Caroline say was something about its being 
very hard on the girl. Anyway, what does all this matter? We all know 
Angela was off to school in a day or two.” 

Poirot said: “You do not see the force of my objection. Why should 
Amyas Crale pack for the girl? It is absurd, that! There was Mrs. Crale, 
there was Miss Williams, there was a housemaid. It is a woman’s job to 
pack—not a man’s.” 

Philip Blake said impatiently: 

“What does it matter? It’s nothing to do with the crime.” 

“You think not? For me, it was the first point that struck me as 
suggestive. And it is immediately followed by another. Mrs. Crale, a 
desperate woman, broken-hearted, who has threatened her husband a short 
while before and who is certainly contemplating either suicide or murder, 
now offers in the most amicable manner to bring her husband down some 
iced beer.” 

Meredith Blake said slowly: “That isn’t odd if she was contemplating 
murder. Then, surely, it is just what she would do. Dissimulate!” 

“You think so? She has decided to poison her husband, she has already 
got the poison. Her husband keeps a supply of beer down in the Battery 
garden. Surely if she has any intelligence at all, she will put the poison in 
one of those bottles at a moment when there is no one about.” 

Meredith Blake objected. 

“She couldn’t have done that. Somebody else might have drunk it.” 

“Yes, Elsa Greer. Do you tell me that having made up her mind to 
murder her husband, Caroline Crale would have scruples against killing the 
girl too? 

“But let us not argue the point. Let us confine ourselves to facts. 
Caroline Crale says she will send her husband down some iced beer. She 
goes up to the house, fetches a bottle from the conservatory where it was 
kept and takes it down to him. She pours it out and gives it to him. 

“Amyas Crale drinks it off and says: ‘Everything tastes foul today.’ 

“Mrs. Crale goes up again to the house. She has lunch and appears 
much as usual. It has been said of her that she looks a little worried and 
preoccupied. That does not help us—for there is no criterion of behaviour 
for a murderer. There are calm murderers and excited murderers. 

“After lunch she goes down again to the Battery. She discovers her 
husband dead and does, shall we say, the obviously expected things. She 
registers emotion and she sends the governess to telephone for a doctor. We 
now come to a fact which has previously not been known.” He looked at 
Miss Williams. “You do not object?” 

Miss Williams was rather pale. She said: “I did not pledge you to 
secrecy.” 

Quietly, but with telling effect, Poirot recounted what the governess had 
seen. 

Elsa Dittisham moved her position. She stared at the drab little woman 
in the big chair. She said incredibly: 

“You actually saw her do that?” 

Philip Blake sprang up. 

“But that settles it!” he shouted. “That settles it once and for all.” 

Hercule Poirot looked at him mildly. He said: “Not necessarily.” 

Angela Warren said sharply: “I don’t believe it.” There was a quick 
hostile glint in the glance she shot at the little governess. 

Meredith Blake was pulling at his moustache, his face dismayed. Alone, 
Miss Williams remained undisturbed. She sat very upright and there was a 
spot of colour in each cheek. 

She said: “That is what I saw.” 

Poirot said slowly: “There is, of course, only your word for it....” 

“There is only my word for it.” The indomitable grey eyes met his. “I 
am not accustomed, Mr. Poirot, to having my word doubted.” 

Hercule Poirot bowed his head. He said: 

“IT do not doubt your word, Miss Williams. What you saw took place 
exactly as you say it did—and because of what you saw I realized that 
Caroline Crale was not guilty—could not possibly be guilty.” 

For the first time, that tall, anxious-faced young man, John Rattery, 
spoke. He said: “I’d be interested to know why you say that, Mr. Poirot.” 

Poirot turned to him. 

“Certainly. I will tell you. What did Miss Williams see—she saw 
Caroline Crale very carefully and anxiously wiping off fingerprints and 
subsequently imposing her dead husband’s fingerprints on the beer bottle. 
On the beer bottle, mark. But the coniine was in the glass—not in the bottle. 
The police found no traces of coniine in the bottle. There had never been 
any coniine in the bottle. And Caroline Crale didn’t know that. 

“She who is supposed to have poisoned her husband didn’t know how 
he had been poisoned. She thought the poison was in the bottle.” 

Meredith objected: “But why—” 

Poirot interrupted him in a flash. 

“Yes—why? Why did Caroline Crale try so desperately to establish the 
theory of suicide? The answer is—must be—quite simple. Because she 
knew who had poisoned him and she was willing to do anything—endure 
anything—rather than let that person be suspected. 

“There is not far to go now. Who could that person be? Would she have 
shielded Philip Blake? Or Meredith? Or Elsa Greer? Or Cecilia Williams? 
No, there is only one person whom she would be willing to protect at all 
costs.” 

He paused: “Miss Warren, if you have brought your sister’s last letter 
with you, I should like to read it aloud.” 

Angela Warren said: “No.” 

“But, Miss Warren—” 

Angela got up. Her voice rang out, cold as steel. 

“I realize very well what you are suggesting. You are saying, are you 
not, that I killed Amyas Crale and that my sister knew it. I deny that 
allegation utterly.” 

Poirot said: “The letter....” 

“That letter was meant for my eyes alone.” 

Poirot looked to where the two youngest people in the room stood 
together. 

Carla Lemarchant said: “Please, Aunt Angela, won’t you do as Mr. 
Poirot asks?” 

Angela Warren said bitterly: “Really, Carla! Have you no sense of 
decency? She was your mother—you—” 

Carla’s voice rang out clear and fierce. 

“Yes, she was my mother. That’s why I’ve a right to ask you. I’m 
speaking for her. I want that letter read.” 

Slowly, Angela Warren took out the letter from her bag and handed it to 
Poirot. She said bitterly: 

“I wish I had never shown it to you.” 

Turning away from them she stood looking out of the window. 

As Hercule Poirot read aloud Caroline Crale’s last letter, the shadows 
were deepening in the corners of the room. Carla had a sudden feeling of 
someone in the room, gathering shape, listening, breathing, waiting. She 
thought: “She’s here—my mother’s here. Caroline—Caroline Crale is here 
in this room!” 

Hercule Poirot’s voice ceased. He said: 

“You will all agree, I think, that that is a very remarkable letter. A 
beautiful letter, too, but certainly remarkable. For there is one striking 
omission in it—it contains no protestation of innocence.” 

Angela Warren said without turning her head: “That was unnecessary.” 

“Yes, Miss Warren, it was unnecessary. Caroline Crale had no need to 
tell her sister that she was innocent—because she thought her sister knew 
that fact already—knew it for the best of all reasons. All Caroline Crale was 
concerned about was to comfort and reassure and to avert the possibility of 
a confession from Angela. She reiterates again and again—It’s all right, 
darling, it’s all right.” 

Angela Warren said: “Can’t you understand? She wanted me to be 
happy, that’s all.” 

“Yes, she wanted you to be happy, that is abundantly clear. It is her one 
preoccupation. She has a child, but it is not that child of whom she is 
thinking—that is to come later. No, it is her sister who occupies her mind to 
the exclusion of everything else. Her sister must be reassured, must be 
encouraged to live her life, to be happy and successful. And so that the 
burden of acceptance may not be too great, Caroline includes that one very 
significant phrase: ‘One must pay one’s debts.’ 

“That one phrase explains everything. It refers explicitly to the burden 
that Caroline has carried for so many years ever since, in a fit of 
uncontrolled adolescent rage, she hurled a paperweight at her baby sister 
and injured that sister for life. Now, at last, she has the opportunity to pay 
the debt she owes. And if it is any consolation, I will say to you all that I 
earnestly believe that in the payment of that debt, Caroline Crale did 
achieve a peace and serenity greater than any she had ever known. Because 
of her belief that she was paying that debt, the ordeal of trial and 
condemnation could not touch her. It is a strange thing to say of a 
condemned murderess—but she had everything to make her happy. Yes, 
more than you imagine, as I will show you presently. 

“See how, by this explanation, everything falls into its place where 
Caroline’s own reactions are concerned. Look at the series of events from 
her point of view. To begin with, on the preceding evening, an event occurs 
which reminds her forcibly of her own undisciplined girlhood. Angela 
throws a paperweight at Amyas Crale. That, remember, is what she herself 
did many years ago. Angela shouts out that she wishes Amyas was dead. 
Then, on the next morning, Caroline comes into the little conservatory and 
finds Angela tampering with the beer. Remember Miss Williams’s words: 
‘Angela was there. She looked guilty...’ Guilty of playing truant, was what 
Miss Williams meant, but to Caroline, Angela’s guilty face, as she was 
caught unawares, would have a different meaning. Remember that on at 
least one occasion before Angela had put things in Amyas’s drink. It was an 
idea which might readily occur to her. 

“Caroline takes the bottle that Angela gives her and goes down with it 
to the Battery. And there she pours it out and gives it to Amyas, and he 
makes a face as he tosses it off and utters those significant words: 
‘Everything tastes foul today.’ 

“Caroline has no suspicions then—but after lunch she goes down to the 
Battery and finds her husband dead—and she has no doubt at all but that he 
has been poisoned. She had not done it. Who, then, has? And the whole 
thing comes over her with a rush—Angela’s threats, Angela’s face stooping 
over the beer and caught unawares—guilty—guilty—guilty. Why has the 
child done it? As a revenge on Amyas, perhaps not meaning to kill, just to 
make him ill or sick? Or has she done it for her, Caroline’s sake? Has she 
realized and resented Amyas’s desertion of her sister? Caroline remembers 
—oh, so well—her own undisciplined violent emotions at Angela’s age. 
And only one thought springs to her mind. How can she protect Angela? 
Angela handled that bottle—Angela’s fingerprints will be on it. She quickly 
wipes it and polishes it. If only everybody can be got to believe it is suicide. 
If Amyas’s fingerprints are the only ones found. She tries to fit his dead 
fingers round the bottle—working desperately—listening for someone to 
come.... 

“Once take that assumption as true, and everything from then on fits in. 
Her anxiety about Angela all along, her insistence on getting her away, 
keeping her out of touch with what was going on. Her fear of Angela’s 
being questioned unduly by the police. Finally, her overwhelming anxiety 
to get Angela out of England before the trial comes on. Because she is 
always terrified that Angela might break down and confess.” 

Slowly, Angela Warren swung round. Her eyes, hard and contemptuous, 
ranged over the faces turned towards her. 

She said: 

“You’re blind fools—all of you. Don’t you know that if I had done it I 
would have confessed! I’d never have let Caroline suffer for what I’d done. 
Never!” 

Poirot said: 

“But you did tamper with the beer.” 

“I? Tamper with the beer?” 

Poirot turned to Meredith Blake. 

“Listen, monsieur. In your account here of what happened, you describe 
having heard sounds in this room, which is below your bedroom, on the 
morning of the crime.” 

Blake nodded. 

“But it was only a cat.” 

“How do you know it was a cat?” 

“I—I can’t remember. But it was a cat. I am quite sure it was a cat. The 
window was open just wide enough for a cat to get through.” 

“But it was not fixed in that position. The sash moves freely. It could 
have been pushed up and a human being could have got in and out.” 

“Yes, but I know it was a cat.” 

“You did not see a cat?” 

Blake said perplexedly and slowly: 

“No, I did not see it—” He paused, frowning. “And yet I know.” 

“I will tell you why you know presently. In the meantime I put this point 
to you. Someone could have come up to the house that morning, have got 
into your laboratory, taken something from the shelf and gone again without 
your seeing them. Now if that someone had come over from Alderbury it 
could not have been Philip Blake, nor Elsa Greer, nor Amyas Crale nor 
Caroline Crale. We know quite well what all those four were doing. That 
leaves Angela Warren and Miss Williams. Miss Williams was over here— 
you actually met her as you went out. She told you then that she was 
looking for Angela. Angela had gone bathing early, but Miss Williams did 
not see her in the water, nor anywhere on the rocks. She could swim across 
to this side easily—in fact she did so later in the morning when she was 
bathing with Philip Blake. I suggest that she swam across here, came up to 
the house, got in through the window, and took something from the shelf.” 

Angela Warren said: “I did nothing of the kind—not—at least—” 

“Ah!” Poirot gave a yelp of triumph. “You have remembered. You told 
me, did you not, that to play a malicious joke on Amyas Crale you pinched 
some of what you called ‘the cat stuff’—that is how you put it—” 

Meredith Blake said sharply: 

“Valerian! Of course.” 

“Exactly. That is what made you sure in your mind that it was a cat who 
had been in the room. Your nose is very sensitive. You smelled the faint, 
unpleasant odour of valerian without knowing, perhaps, that you did so— 
but it suggested to your subconscious mind ‘Cat.’ Cats love valerian and 
will go anywhere for it. Valerian is particularly nasty to taste, and it was 
your account of it the day before which made mischievous Miss Angela 
plan to put some in her brother-in-law’s beer, which she knew he always 
tossed down his throat in a draught.” 

Angela Warren said wonderingly: “Was it really that day? I remember 
taking it perfectly. Yes, and I remember getting out the beer and Caroline 
coming in and nearly catching me! Of course I remember...But I’ve never 
connected it with that particular day.” 

“Of course not—because there was no connection in your mind. The 
two events were entirely dissimilar to you. One was on a par with other 
mischievous pranks—the other was a bombshell of tragedy arriving without 
warning and succeeding in banishing all lesser incidents from your mind. 
But me, I noticed when you spoke of it that you said: ‘I pinched, etc., etc., 
to put it in Amyas’s drink.’ You did not say you had actually done so.” 

“No, because I never did. Caroline came in just when I was unscrewing 
the bottle. Oh!” It was a cry. “And Caroline thought—she thought it was me—” 

She stopped. She looked round. She said quietly in her usual cool tones: 
“I suppose you all think so, too.” 

She paused and then said: “I didn’t kill Amyas. Not as the result of a 
malicious joke nor in any other way. If I had I would never have kept 
silence.” 

Miss Williams said sharply: 

“Of course you wouldn’t, my dear.” She looked at Hercule Poirot. 
“Nobody but a fool would think so.” 

Hercule Poirot said mildly: 

“I am not a fool and I do not think so. I know quite well who killed 
Amyas Crale.” 

He paused. 

“There is always a danger of accepting facts as proved which are really 
nothing of the kind. Let us take the situation at Alderbury. A very old 
situation. Two women and one man. We have taken it for granted that 
Amyas Crale proposed to leave his wife for the other woman. But I suggest 
to you now that he never intended to do anything of the kind. 

“He had had infatuations for women before. They obsessed him while 
they lasted, but they were soon over. The women he had fallen in love with 
were usually women of a certain experience—they did not expect too much 
of him. But this time the woman did. She was not, you see, a woman at all. 
She was a girl, and in Caroline Crale’s words, she was terribly sincere...She 
may have been hard-boiled and sophisticated in speech, but in love she was 
frighteningly single-minded. Because she herself had a deep and 
overmastering passion for Amyas Crale she assumed that he had the same 
for her. She assumed without any question that their passion was for life. 
She assumed without asking him that he was going to leave his wife. 

“But why, you will say, did Amyas Crale not undeceive her? And my 
answer is—the picture. He wanted to finish his picture. 

“To some people that sounds incredible—but not to anybody who 
knows about artists. And we have already accepted that explanation in 
principle. That conversation between Crale and Meredith Blake is more 
intelligible now. Crale is embarrassed—pats Blake on the back, assures him 
optimistically the whole thing is going to pan out all right. To Amyas Crale, 
you see, everything is simple. He is painting a picture, slightly encumbered 
by what he describes as a couple of jealous, neurotic women—but neither 
of them is going to be allowed to interfere with what to him is the most 
important thing in life. 

“Tf he were to tell Elsa the truth it would be all up with the picture. 
Perhaps in the first flush of his feelings for her he did talk about leaving 
Caroline. Men do say these things when they are in love. Perhaps he merely 
let it be assumed, as he is letting it be assumed now. He doesn’t care what 
Elsa assumes. Let her think what she likes. Anything to keep her quiet for 
another day or two. 

“Then—he will tell her the truth—that things between them are over. 
He has never been a man to be troubled with scruples. 

“He did, I think, make an effort not to get embroiled with Elsa to begin 
with. He warned her what kind of a man he was—but she would not take 
warning. She rushed on her Fate. And to a man like Crale women were fair 
game. If you had asked him he would have said easily that Elsa was young 
—she’d soon get over it. That was the way Amyas Crale’s mind worked. 

“His wife was actually the only person he cared about at all. He wasn’t 
worrying much about her. She’d only got to put up with things for a few 
days longer. He was furious with Elsa for blurting out things to Caroline, 
but he still optimistically thought it would be ‘all right.’ Caroline would 
forgive him as she had done so often before, and Elsa—Elsa would just 
have to ‘lump it.’ So simple are the problems of life to a man like Amyas 
Crale. 

“But I think that that last evening he became really worried. About 
Caroline, not about Elsa. Perhaps he went to her room and she refused to 
speak with him. At any rate, after a restless night, he took her aside after 
breakfast and blurted out the truth. He had been infatuated with Elsa, but it 
was all over. Once he’d finished the picture he’d never see her again. 

“And it was in answer to that that Caroline Crale cried out indignantly: 
“You and your women!’ That phrase, you see, put Elsa in a class with others 
—those others who had gone their way. And she added indignantly: ‘Some 
day Ill kill you.’ 

“She was angry, revolted by his callousness and by his cruelty to the 
girl. When Philip Blake saw her in the hall and heard her murmur to herself, 
‘It’s too cruel!’ it was of Elsa she was thinking. 

“As for Crale, he came out of the library, found Elsa with Philip Blake, 
and brusquely ordered her down to go on with the sitting. What he did not 
know was that Elsa Greer had been sitting just outside the library window 
and had overheard everything. And the account she gave later of that 
conversation was not the true one. There is only her word for it, remember. 

“Imagine the shock it must have been to her to hear the truth, brutally 
spoken! 

“On the previous afternoon Meredith Blake has told us that whilst he 
was waiting for Caroline to leave this room he was standing in the doorway 
with his back to the room. He was talking to Elsa Greer. That means that 
she would have been facing him and that she could see exactly what 
Caroline was doing over his shoulder—and that she was the only person 
who could do so. 

“She saw Caroline take that poison. She said nothing, but she 
remembered it as she sat outside the library window. 

“When Amyas Crale came out she made the excuse of wanting a 
pullover, and went up to Caroline Crale’s room to look for that poison. 
Women know where other women are likely to hide things. She found it, 
and being careful not to obliterate any fingerprints or to leave her own, she 
drew off the fluid into a fountain-pen filler. 

“Then she came down again and went off with Crale to the Battery 
garden. And presently, no doubt, she poured him out some beer and he 
tossed it down in his usual way. 

“Meanwhile, Caroline Crale was seriously disturbed. When she saw 
Elsa come up to the house (this time really to fetch a pullover), Caroline 
slipped quickly down to the Battery garden and tackled her husband. What 
he is doing is shameful! She won’t stand for it! It’s unbelievably cruel and 
hard on the girl! Amyas, irritable at being interrupted, says it’s all settled— 
when the picture is done he’II send the girl packing! ‘It’s all settled—I’ll 
send her packing. I tell you.’ 

“And then they hear the footsteps of the two Blakes, and Caroline 
comes out and, slightly embarrassed, murmurs something about Angela and 
school and having a lot to do, and by a natural association of ideas the two 
men judge the conversation they have overheard refers to Angela, and ‘I’ ll 
send her packing’ becomes ‘I’Il see to her packing.’ 

“And Elsa, pullover in hand, comes down the path, cool and smiling, 
and takes up the pose once more. 

“She has counted, no doubt, upon Caroline’s being suspected and the 
coniine bottle being found in her room. But Caroline now plays into her 
hands completely. She brings down some iced beer and pours it out for her 
husband. 

“Amyas tosses it off, making a face and says: ‘Everything tastes foul 
today.’ 

“Do you not see how significant that remark is? Everything tastes foul? 
Then there has been something else before that beer that has tasted 
unpleasant and the taste of which is still in his mouth. And one other point. 
Philip Blake speaks of Crale’s staggering a little and wonders ‘if he has 
been drinking.’ But that slight stagger was the first sign of the coniine 
working, and that means that it had already been administered to him some 
time before Caroline brought him the iced bottle of beer. 

“And so Elsa Greer sat on the grey wall and posed and, since she must 
keep him from suspecting until it was too late, she talked to Amyas Crale 
brightly and naturally. Presently she saw Meredith on the bench above and 
waved her hand to him and acted her part even more thoroughly for his 
behalf. 

“And Amyas Crale, a man who detested illness and refused to give in to 
it, painted doggedly on till his limbs failed and his speech thickened, and he 
sprawled there on that bench, helpless, but with his mind still clear. 

“The bell sounded from the house and Meredith left the bench to come 
down to the Battery. I think in that brief moment Elsa left her place and ran 
across to the table and dropped the last few drops of the poison into the beer 
glass that held that last innocent drink. (She got rid of the dropper on the 
path up to the house—crushing it to powder.) Then she met Meredith in the 
doorway. 

“There is a glare there coming in out of the shadows. Meredith did not 
see very clearly—only his friend sprawled in a familiar position and saw his 
eyes turn from the picture in what he described as a malevolent glare. 

“How much did Amyas know or guess? How much his conscious mind 
knew we cannot tell, but his hand and his eye were faithful.” 

Hercule Poirot gestured towards the picture on the wall. 

“I should have known when I first saw that picture. For it is a very 
remarkable picture. It is the picture of a murderess painted by her victim—it 
is the picture of a girl watching her lover die....” 