“There is a case against every person here. We will, Mr. George Lee, 
begin with the case against you. You had no love for your father! You kept 
on good terms with him for the sake of money. On the day of his death he 
threatened to cut down your allowance. You knew that on his death you 
would probably inherit a very substantial sum. There is the motive. After 
dinner you went, as you say, to telephone. You did telephone—but the call 
lasted only five minutes. After that you could easily have gone to your 
father’s room, chatted with him, and then attacked him and killed him. You 
left the room and turned the key from outside, for you hoped the affair 
would be put down to a burglar. You omitted, in your panic, to make sure 
that the window was fully open so as to support the burglar theory. That was 
stupid; but you are, if you will pardon my saying so, rather a stupid man! 

“However,” said Poirot, after a brief pause during which George tried to 
speak and failed, “many stupid men have been criminals!” 

He turned his eyes on Magdalene. 

“Madame, too, she also had a motive. She is, I think, in debt, and the 
tone of certain of your father’s remarks may—have caused her uneasiness. 
She, too, has no alibi. She went to telephone, but she did not telephone, and 
we have only her word for what she did do... . 

“Then,” he paused, “there is Mr. David Lee. We have heard, not once 
but many times, of the revengeful tempers and long memories that went 
with the Lee blood. Mr. David Lee did not forget or forgive the way his 
father had treated his mother. A final jibe directed at the dead lady may 
have been the last straw. David Lee is said to have been playing the piano at 
the time of the murder. By a coincidence he was playing the ‘Dead March.’ 
But suppose somebody else was playing that ‘Dead March,’ somebody who 
knew what he was going to do, and who approved his action?” 

Hilda Lee said quietly: 

“That is an infamous suggestion.” 

Poirot turned to her. “I will offer you another, madame. It was your 
hand that did the deed. It was you who crept upstairs to execute judgment 
on a man you considered beyond human forgiveness. You are of those, 
madame, who can be terrible in anger. . . .” 

Hilda said: “I did not kill him.” 

Superintendent Sugden said brusquely: 

“Mr. Poirot’s quite right. There is a possible case against everyone 
except Mr. Alfred Lee, Mr. Harry Lee, and Mrs. Alfred Lee.” 

Poirot said gently: 

“T should not even except those three. . . .” 

The superintendent protested: “Oh, come now, Mr. Poirot!” 

Lydia Lee said: 

“And what is the case against me, M. Poirot?” 

She smiled a little as she spoke, her brows raised ironically. 

Poirot bowed. He said: 

“Your motive, madame, I pass over. It is sufficiently obvious. As to the 
rest, you were wearing last night a flowered taffeta dress of a very 
distinctive pattern with a cape. I will remind you of the fact that Tressilian, 
the butler, is shortsighted. Objects at a distance are dim and vague to him. I 
will also point out that your drawing room is big and lighted by heavily 
shaded lamps. On that night, a minute or two before the cries were heard, 
Tressilian came into the drawing room to take away the coffee-cups. He 
saw you, as he thought, in a familiar attitude by the far window half 
concealed by the heavy curtains.” 

Lydia Lee said: “He did see me.” 

Poirot went on: 

“I suggest that it is possible that what Tressilian saw was the cape of 
your dress, arranged to show by the window curtain, as though you yourself 
were standing there.” 

Lydia said: “I was standing there. .. .” 

Alfred said: “How dare you suggest—?” 

Harry interrupted him. 

“Let him go on, Alfred. It’s our turn next. How do you suggest that dear 
Alfred killed his beloved father since we were both together in the dining 
room at the time?” 

Poirot beamed at him. 

“That,” he said, “is very simple. An alibi gains in force accordingly as 
it is unwillingly given. You and your brother are on bad terms. It is well 
known. You jibe at him in public. He has not a good word to say for you! 
But, supposing that were all part of a very clever plot. Supposing that 
Alfred Lee is tired of dancing attendance upon an exacting taskmaster. 
Supposing that you and he have got together some time ago. Your plan is 
laid. You come home. Alfred appears to resent your presence. He shows 
jealousy and dislike of you. You show contempt for him. And then comes 
the night of the murder you have so cleverly planned together. One of you 
remains in the dining room, talking and perhaps quarrelling aloud as though 
two people were there. The other goes upstairs and commits the crime. .. .” 

Alfred sprang to his feet. 

“You devil!” he said. His voice was inarticulate. 

Sugden was staring at Poirot. He said: 

“Do you really mean—?” 

Poirot said, with a sudden ring of authority in his voice: 

“I have had to show you the possibilities! These are the things that 
might have happened! Which of them actually did happen we can only tell 
by passing from the outside appearance to the inside reality. . . .” 

He paused and then said slowly: 

“We must come back, as I said before, to the character of Simeon Lee 
himself... .” 

There was a momentary pause. Strangely enough, all indignation and all 
rancour had died down. Hercule Poirot held his audience under the spell of 
his personality. They watched him, fascinated, as he began slowly to speak. 

“It is all there, you see. The dead man is the focus and centre of the 
mystery! We must probe deep into the heart and mind of Simeon Lee and 
see what we find there. For a man does not live and die to himself alone. 
That which he has, he hands on—to those who come after him.... 

“What had Simeon Lee to bequeath to his sons and daughter? Pride, to 
begin with—a pride which, in the old man, was frustrated in his 
disappointment over his children. Then there was the quality of patience. 
We have been told that Simeon Lee waited patiently for years in order to 
revenge himself upon someone who had done him an injury. We see that 
that aspect of his temperament was inherited by the son who resembled him 
least in face. David Lee also could remember and continue to harbour 
resentment through long years. In face, Harry Lee was the only one of his 
children who closely resembled him. That resemblance is quite striking 
when we examine the portrait of Simeon Lee as a young man. There is the 
same high-bridged aquiline nose, the long sharp line of the jaw, the 
backward poise of the head. I think, too, that Harry inherited many of his 
father’s mannerisms—that habit, for instance, of throwing back his head 
and laughing, and another habit of drawing his finger along the line of his 
jaw. 

“Bearing all these things in mind, and being convinced that the murder 
was committed by a person closely connected with the dead man, I studied 
the family from the psychological standpoint. That is, I tried to decide 
which of them were psychologically possible criminals. And, in my 
judgment, only two persons qualified in that respect. They were Alfred Lee 
and Hilda Lee, David’s wife. David himself I rejected as a possible 
murderer. I do not think a person of his delicate susceptibilities could have 
faced the actual bloodshed of a cut throat. George Lee and his wife I 
likewise rejected. Whatever their desires, I did not think they had the 
temperament to take a risk. They were both essentially cautious. Mrs. 
Alfred Lee I felt sure was quite incapable of an act of violence. She has too 
much irony in her nature. About Harry Lee I hesitated. He had a certain 
coarse truculence of aspect, but I was nearly sure that Harry Lee, in spite of 
his bluff and his bluster, was essentially a weakling. That, I now know, was 
also his father’s opinion. Harry, he said, was worth no more than the rest. 

That left me with two people I have already mentioned. Alfred Lee was a 
person capable of a great deal of selfless devotion. He was a man who had 
controlled and subordinated himself to the will of another for many years. It 
was always possible under these conditions for something to snap. 
Moreover, he might quite possibly have harboured a secret grudge against 
his father which might gradually have grown in force through never being 
expressed in any way. It is the quietest and meekest people who are often 
capable of the most sudden and unexpected violence for the reason that 
when their control does snap, it does so entirely! The other person I 
considered was capable of the crime was Hilda Lee. She is the kind of 
individual who is capable, on occasions, of taking the law into her own 
hands—though never through selfish motives. Such people judge and also 
execute. Many Old Testament characters are of this type. Jael and Judith, 
for example. 

“And now having got so far I examined the circumstances of the crime 
itself. And the first thing that arises—that strikes one in the face, as it were 
—is the extraordinary conditions under which that crime took place! Take 
your minds back to that room where Simeon Lee lay dead. If you 
remember, there was both a heavy table and a heavy chair overturned, a 
lamp, crockery, glasses, etc. But the chair and the table were especially 
surprising. They were of solid mahogany. It was hard to see how any 
struggle between that frail old man and his opponent could result in so 
much solid furniture being overturned and knocked down. The whole thing 
seemed unreal. And yet surely no one in their senses would stage such an 
effect if it had not really occurred—unless possibly Simeon Lee had been 
killed by a powerful man and the idea was to suggest that the assailant was 
a woman or somebody of weak physique. 

“But such an idea was unconvincing in the extreme, since the noise of 
the furniture would give the alarm and the murderer would thereby have 
very little time to make his exit. It would surely be to anyone’s advantage to 
cut Simeon Lee’s throat as quietly as possible. 

“Another extraordinary point was the turning of the key in the lock 
from the outside. Again, there seemed no reason for such a proceeding. It 
could not suggest suicide, since nothing in the death itself accorded with 
suicide. It was not to suggest escape through the windows—for those 
windows were so arranged that escape that way was impossible! Moreover, 
once again, it involved time. Time which must be precious to the murderer! 

“There was one other incomprehensible thing—a piece of rubber cut 
from Simeon Lee’s spongebag and a small wooden peg shown to me by 
Superintendent Sugden. These had been picked up from the floor by one of 
the persons who first entered the room. There again—these things did not 
make sense! They meant exactly nothing at all! Yet they had been there. 

“The crime, you perceive, is becoming increasingly incomprehensible. 
It has no order, no method—enfin, it is not reasonable. 

“And now we come to a further difficulty. Superintendent Sugden was 
sent for by the dead man; a robbery was reported to him, and he was asked 
to return an hour and a half later. Why? If it is because Simeon Lee 
suspected his granddaughter or some other member of the family, why does 
he not ask Superintendent Sugden to wait downstairs while he has his 
interview straight away with the suspected party? With the superintendent 
actually in the house, his lever over the guilty person would have been 
much stronger. 

“So now we arrive at the point where not only the behaviour of the 
murderer is extraordinary, but the behaviour of Simeon Lee also is 
extraordinary! 

“And I say to myself: ‘This thing is all wrong!’ Why? Because we are 
looking at it from the wrong angle. We are looking at it from the angle that 
the murderer wants us to look at it... . 

“We have three things that do not make sense: the struggle, the turned 
key, and the snip of rubber. But there must be some way of looking at those 
three things which would make sense! And I empty my mind blank and 
forget the circumstances of the crime and take these things on their own 
merits. I say—a struggle. What does that suggest? Violence—breakage— 
noise ... The key? Why does one turn a key? So that no one shall enter? But 
the key did not prevent that, since the door was broken down almost 
immediately. To keep someone in? To keep someone out? A snip of rubber? 
I say to myself: ‘A little piece of a spongebag is a little piece of a 
spongebag, and that is all!’ 

“So you would say there is nothing there—and yet that is not strictly 
true, for three impressions remain: noise—seclusion—blankness. . . . 

“Do they fit with either of my two possibles? No, they do not. To both 
Alfred Lee and Hilda Lee a quiet murder would have been infinitely 
preferable, to have wasted time in locking the door from the outside is 
absurd, and the little piece of spongebag means yet once more—nothing at 
all! 

“And yet I have very strongly the feeling that there is nothing absurd 
about this crime—that it is on the contrary, very well planned and 
admirably executed. That is has, in fact, succeeded! Therefore that 
everything that has happened was meant... 

“And then, going over it again, I got my first glimmer of light... . 

“Blood—so much blood—blood everywhere . . . An insistence on 
blood—fresh, wet, gleaming blood . .. So much blood—too much blood... 

“And a second thought comes with that. This is a crime of blood—it is 
in the blood. It is Simeon Lee’s own blood that rises up against him. . . .” 

Hercule Poirot leaned forward. 

“The two most valuable clues in this case were uttered quite 
unconsciously by two different people. The first was when Mrs. Alfred Lee 
quoted a line from Macbeth: ‘Who would have thought the old man to have 
had so much blood in him?’ The other was a phrase uttered by Tressilian, 
the butler. He described how he felt dazed and things seemed to be 
happening that had happened before. It was a very simple occurrence that 
gave him that strange feeling. He heard a ring at the bell and went to open 
the door to Harry Lee, and the next day he did the same thing to Stephen 
Farr. 

“Now why did he have that feeling? Look at Harry Lee and Stephen 
Farr and you will see why. They are astoundingly alike! That was why 
opening the door to Stephen Farr was just like opening the door to Harry 
Lee. It might almost have been the same man standing there. And then, only 
today, Tressilian mentioned that he was always getting muddled between 
people. No wonder! Stephen Farr has a high-bridged nose, a habit of 
throwing his head back when he laughs, and a trick of stroking his jaw with 
his forefinger. Look long and earnestly at the portrait of Simeon Lee as a 
young man and you see not only Harry Lee, but Stephen Farr. . . .” 

Stephen moved. His chair creaked. Poirot said: 

“Remember that outburst of Simeon Lee, his tirade against his family. 
He said, you remember it, that he would swear he had better sons born the 
wrong side of the blanket. We are back again at the character of Simeon 
Lee. Simeon Lee, who was successful with women and who broke his 
wife’s heart! Simeon Lee, who boasted to Pilar that he might have a 
bodyguard of sons almost the same age! So I came to this conclusion: 

Simeon Lee had not only his legitimate family in the house, but an 
unacknowledged and unrecognized son of his own blood.” 

Stephen got to his feet. Poirot said: 

“That was your real reason, wasn’t it? Not that pretty romance of the 
girl you met in the train! You were coming here before you met her. Coming 
to see what kind of a man your father was. . . .” 

Stephen had gone dead white. He said, and his voice was broken and 
husky: 

“Yes, I’ve always wondered . . . Mother spoke about him sometimes. It 
grew into a kind of obsession with me—to see what he was like! I made a 
bit of money and I came to England. I wasn’t going to let him know who I 
was. I pretended to be old Eb’s son. I came here for one reason only—to see 
the man who was my father. .. .” 

Superintendent Sugden said in almost a whisper: 

“Lord, I’ve been blind . . . I can see it now. Twice I’ve taken you for 
Mr. Harry Lee and then seen my mistake, and yet I never guessed!” 

He turned on Pilar. 

“That was it, wasn’t it? It was Stephen Farr you saw standing outside 
that door? You hesitated, I remember, and looked at him before you said it 
was a woman. It was Farr you saw, and you weren’t going to give him 
away.” 

There was a gentle rustle. Hilda Lee’s deep voice spoke: 

“No,” she said. “You’re wrong. It was I whom Pilar saw... .” 

Poirot said: 

“You, madame? Yes, I thought so... .” 

Hilda said quietly: 

“Self-preservation is a curious thing. I wouldn’t believe I could be such 
a coward. To keep silence just because I was afraid!” 

Poirot said: 

“You will tell us now?” 

She nodded. 

“I was with David in the music room. He was playing. He was in a very 
queer mood. I was a little frightened and I felt my responsibility very keenly 
because it was I who had insisted on coming here. David began to play the 
‘Dead March,’ and suddenly I made up my mind. However odd it might 
seem, I determined that we would both leave at once—that night. I went 
quietly out of the music room and upstairs. I meant to go to old Mr. Lee and tell him quite plainly why we were going. I went along the corridor to his 
room and knocked on the door. There was no answer. I knocked again a 
little louder. There was still no answer. Then I tried the door handle. The 
door was locked. And then, as I stood hesitating, I heard a sound inside the 
room—” 

She stopped. 

“You won’t believe me, but it’s true! Someone was in there—assaulting 
Mr. Lee. I heard tables and chairs overturned and the crash of glass and 
china, and then I heard that one last horrible cry that died away to nothing 
—and then silence. 

“I stood there paralysed! I couldn’t move! And then Mr. Farr came 
running along and Magdalene and all the others and Mr. Farr and Harry 
began to batter on the door. It went down and we saw the room, and there 
was no one in it—except Mr. Lee lying dead in all that blood.” 

Her quiet voice rose higher. She cried: 

“There was no one else there—no one, you understand! And no one 
had come out of the room... .” 

Superintendent Sugden drew a deep breath. He said: 

“Either ’m going mad or everybody else is! What you’ve said, Mrs. 
Lee, is just plumb impossible. It’s crazy!” 

Hilda Lee cried: 

“I tell you I heard them fighting in there, and I heard the old man 
scream when his throat was cut—and no one came out and no one was in 
the room!” 

Hercule Poirot said: 

“And all this time you have said nothing.” 

Hilda Lee’s face was white, but she said steadily: 

“No, because if I told you what had happened, there’s only one thing 
you could say or think—that it was I who killed him. .. .” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“No,” he said. “You did not kill him. His son killed him.” 

Stephen Farr said: 

“I swear before God I never touched him!” 

“Not you,” said Poirot. “He had other sons!” 

Harry said: 

“What the hell—” 

George stared. David drew his hand across his eyes. Alfred blinked 
twice. 

Poirot said: 

“The very first night I was here—the night of the murder—I saw a 
ghost. It was the ghost of the dead man. When I first saw Harry Lee I was 
puzzled. I felt I had seen him before. Then I noted his features carefully and 
I realized how like his father he was, and I told myself that that was what 
caused the feeling of familiarity. 

“But yesterday a man sitting opposite me threw back his head and 
laughed—and I knew who it was Harry Lee reminded me of. And I traced 
again, in another face, the features of the dead man. 

“No wonder poor old Tressilian felt confused when he had answered 
the door not to two, but to three men who resembled each other closely. No 
wonder he confessed to getting muddled about people when there were 
three men in the house who, at a little distance, could pass for each other! 
The same build, the same gestures (one in particular, a trick of stroking the 
jaw), the same habit of laughing with the head thrown back, the same 
distinctive high-bridged nose. Yet the similarity was not always easy to see 
—for the third man had a moustache.” 

He leaned forward. 

“One forgets sometimes that police officers are men, that they have 
wives and children, mothers”—he paused—‘“and fathers . . . Remember 
Simeon Lee’s local reputation: a man who broke his wife’s heart because of 
his affairs with women. A son born the wrong side of the blanket may 
inherit many things. He may inherit his father’s features and even his 
gestures. He may inherit his pride and his patience and his revengeful 
spirit!” 

His voice rose. 

“All your life, Sugden, you’ve resented the wrong your father did you. I 
think you determined long ago to kill him. You come from the next county, 
not very far away. Doubtless your mother, with the money Simeon Lee so 
generously gave her, was able to find a husband who would stand father to 
her child. Easy for you to enter the Middleshire Police Force and wait your 
opportunity. A police superintendent has a grand opportunity of committing 
a murder and getting away with it.” 

Sugden’s face had gone white as paper. 

He said: 

“You’re mad! I was outside the house when he was killed.” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“No, you killed him before you left the house the first time. No one saw 
him alive after you left. It was all so easy for you. Simeon Lee expected 
you, yes, but he never sent for you. It was you who rang him up and spoke 
vaguely about an attempt at robbery. You said you would call upon him just 
before eight that night and would pretend to be collecting for a police 
charity. Simeon Lee had no suspicions. He did not know you were his son. 
You came and told him a tale of substituted diamonds. He opened the safe 
to show you that the real diamonds were safe in his possession. You 
apologized, came back to the hearth with him and, catching him unawares, 
you cut his throat, holding your hand over his mouth so that he shouldn’t 
cry out. Child’s play to a man of your powerful physique. 

“Then you set the scene. You took the diamonds. You piled up tables 
and chairs, lamps and glasses, and twined a very thin rope or cord which 
you had brought in coiled round your body, in and out between them. You 
had with you a bottle of some freshly killed animal’s blood to which you 
had added a quantity of sodium citrate. You sprinkled this about freely and 
added more sodium citrate to the pool of blood which flowed from Simeon 
Lee’s wound. You made up up the fire so that the body should keep its 
warmth. Then you passed the two ends of the cord out through the narrow 
slit at the bottom of the window and let them hang down the wall. You left 
the room and turned the key from the outside. That was vital, since no one 
must, by any chance, enter that room. 

“Then you went out and hid the diamonds in the stone sink garden. If, 
sooner or later, they were discovered there, they would only focus suspicion 
more strongly where you wanted it: on the members of Simeon Lee’s 
legitimate family. A little before nine fifteen you returned and, going up to 
the wall underneath the window, you pulled on the cord. That dislodged the 
carefully piled-up structure you had arranged. Furniture and china fell with 
a crash. You pulled on one end of the cord and rewound it round your body 
under your coat and waistcoat. 

“You had one further device!” 

He turned to the others. 

“Do you remember, all of you, how each of you described the dying 
scream of Mr. Lee in a different way? You, Mr. Lee, described it as the cry 
of a man in mortal agony. Your wife and David Lee both used the 
expression: a soul in hell. Mrs. David Lee, on the contrary, said it was the 
cry of someone who had no soul. She said it was inhuman, like a beast. It 
was Harry Lee who came nearest to the truth. He said it sounded like killing 
a pig. 

“Do you know those long pink bladders that are sold at fairs with faces 
painted on them called ‘Dying Pigs?’ As the air rushes out they give forth 
an inhuman wail. That, Sugden, was your final touch. You arranged one of 
those in the room. The mouth of it was stopped up with a peg, but that peg 
was connected to the cord. When you pulled on the cord the peg came out 
and the pig began to deflate. On top of the falling furniture came the scream 
of the ‘Dying Pig.’ ” 

He turned once more to the others. 

“You see now what it was that Pilar Estravados picked up? The 
superintendent had hoped to get there in time to retrieve that little wisp of 
rubber before anyone noticed it. However, he took it from Pilar quickly 
enough in his most official manner. But remember he never mentioned that 
incident to anyone. In itself, that was a singularly suspicious fact. I heard of 
it from Magdalene Lee and tackled him about it. He was prepared for that 
eventuality. He had snipped a piece from Mr. Lee’s rubber spongebag and 
produced that, together with a wooden peg. Superficially it answered to the 
same description—a fragment of rubber and a piece of wood. It meant, as I 
realized at the time, absolutely nothing! But, fool that I was, I did not at 
once say; ‘This means nothing, so it cannot have been there, and 
Superintendent Sugden is lying . . .’ No, I foolishly went on trying to find an 
explanation for it. It was not until Mademoiselle Estravados was playing 
with a balloon that burst, and she cried out that it must have been a burst 
balloon she picked up in Simeon Lee’s room, that I saw the truth. 

“You see now how everything fits in? The improbable struggle, which 
is necessary to establish a false time of death; the locked door—so that 
nobody shall find the body too soon; the dying man’s scream. The crime is 
now logical and reasonable. 

“But from the moment that Pilar Estravados cried aloud her discovery 
about the balloon, she was a source of danger to the murderer. And if that 
remark had been heard by him from the house (which it well might, for her 
voice was high and clear and the windows were open), she herself was in 
considerable danger. Already she had given the murderer one very nasty 
moment. She had said, speaking of old Mr. Lee, ‘He must have been very 
good-looking when he was young.’ And had added, speaking directly to 
Sugden: ‘Like you.’ She meant that literally, and Sugden knew it. No 
wonder Sugden went purple in the face and nearly choked. It was so 
unexpected and so deadly dangerous. He hoped, after that, to fix the guilt on 
her, but it proved unexpectedly difficult, since, as the old man’s portionless 
granddaughter, she had obviously no motive for the crime. Later, when he 
overheard from the house her clear, high voice calling out its remark about 
the balloon, he decided on desperate measures. He set that booby trap when 
we were at lunch. Luckily, almost by a miracle, it failed. . . .” 

There was dead silence. Then Sugden said quietly: 

“When were you sure?” 

Poirot said: 

“I was not quite sure till I brought home a false moustache and tried it 
on Simeon Lee’s picture. Then—the face that looked at me was yours.” 

Sugden said: 

“God rot his soul in hell! I’m glad I did it!” 