Scene 9:
Detective Humphries assembled the assorted group of suspects in the grand parlor of Warwick Manor, a spectacular Old-Victorian house with splendid chandeliers and gothic arches. There were six of them, all as distinct from one another as chalk and cheese; Reginald, the scorned eldest son; Lady Warwick, the stepmother; Clara, the jilted lover; William, the ambitious caretaker; Frederick, the envious cousin; and Agnes, the faithful old maid.

On the floor lay the lifeless body of Lord Warwick, his face deathly pale in the flickering candlelight.

"Ladies and gentlemen," Detective Humphries began. "The hour is late, and the moon isn't getting any younger. I've gathered you here because one among us has committed an irremediable crime."

Murmurs echoed through the room.

"Lord Warwick," he continued solemnly, "did not die of natural causes as previously suspected. He was poisoned."

Gasps followed. 

"By a rare poison obtained from the Indian rain-forest, Arenic Rajani," Humphries said, pulling out a vial with some purple substance. "The poison was laced to the brandy, a drink only Lord Warwick indulged in."

"Reginald," Humphries started, "stood to inherit everything after his father's death. But it is clear through police investigations into his financial activities that he recently reconciled a substantial debt, a motive, though solid, that does not necessarily determine guilt."

Humphries turned to Clara, "Clara, passionately in love with Lord Warwick, was jilted for Lady Warwick. Heartbreak can trigger the darkest of intentions."

"William, the caretaker, had the keys to the manor and the knowledge of Lord Warwick's routine. Yet, he harbored a secret dream of emancipating himself from servitude by starting his own business. Would he murder for it?

"There was Frederick, whose envy of Warwick’s fortune was no secret. A penniless aristocrat could resort to desperate actions.

"And Agnes," Humphries added, "who had given her life to this family, worshipped Lord Warwick, and even secretly loved him. Could unrequited love drive her to the point of no return?"

Suspicion hung in the room like a dense cloud.

Detective Humphries paused, allowing the silence to fill the room before he continued. "The Arenic Rajani was procured by...Lady Warwick," he revealed.

Lady Warwick jolted at the mention of her name, her icy demeanor crumbling. 

"Yet," Humphries added, locking eyes with her, "she didn't commit the murder. Lady Warwick obtained the poison to end her life, not Lord's. Her guilt from falling out of love for Lord Warwick was her motive."

The room was as silent as a graveyard, everyone holding their breath as Humphries turned to the real killer.

"But the individual who turned her desperation into his deathly design is...Frederick, the resentful cousin."

Abject horror dawned on Frederick's face. 

"Frederick intercepted the parcel containing the poison. He had hoped to pin the blame on Reginald by stirring rumors about his debt. But his sudden eagerness to point fingers, his curiously precise knowledge about the brandy were tell-tale signs. Not to mention the faint residue of purple under his nails— a result of handling the Arenic Rajani."

Frederick’s face turned pale as he whimpered, "I didn't want to kill anyone. I just...I just wanted what was rightfully mine!"

"And so," Detective Humphries gallantly concluded, "The greed and resentment juxtaposed with desperation and unfulfilled dreams led to your downfall, Frederick. The relationships entwined in this room were complicated, lending motivations to many. But in the end, it was the greatest greed that motivated the crime."