Scene 1:
Detective Phillip Harrison leafed through his worn-out notebook one last time, then delicately placed it on the mahogany desk. He stood before the circle of suspects seated around, an oddball assembly tainted with concealed apprehension and jittery incertitude.

Sir Reginald Hugh, the patrician old cantankerous master of Hugh Manor, sat on a heavy, over-stuffed Chesterfield chair. Beside him was his loyal butler, Mr. Johnson, the perennial retainer of the Hugh clan. Then, Lady Margaret, Sir Reginald's estranged younger sister, an embittered spinster. Opposite them was Arthur, the disowned son, back home only to claim his inheritance. At the back, trying to blend with the shadowy corners of the room, stood Mary, the maid.

"In the death of Esther Hugh," began Detective Harrison, in his resonant, authoritative voice. A wave of nervous tension swept them all as the detective slowly pointed his first finger at the unflappable Mr. Johnson.

"Loyalty can sometimes serve as a cloak for deception, can it not, Mr. Johnson?" The man stiffened noticeably. "Your irrefutable faithfulness to the Hugh family is, without doubt, commendable. But it made you turn a blind eye towards Sir Reginald's deeds, didn't it?”

A collective gasp filled the room. Sir Reginald snorted. "What nonsense are you spouting, detective! I never involved Johnson in my personal matters."

Detective Harrison continued, ignoring him, "Mr. Johnson's silence regarding Sir Reginald's financial mismanagement and gambling habits provides motive. You had a lot to lose, didn’t you Sir Reginald? Including a grand inheritance that was due to pass onto Lady Esther once she turned twenty-one."

Arthur’s eyes widened, while Lady Margaret clutched at her handkerchief with a newfound intensity.

"But Johnson, I couldn't see you as a killer," the detective continued, his voice a smokescreen. In a sudden turn, his gaze snapped to Mary. "However, you do have something to gain from Esther’s death, Mary. The way Johnson dotes on you, perhaps even planning to bequeath you something substantial once he gets Esther's inheritance."

Mary, whimpered, shaking her head, "No, sir, I never…I…"

"But, in the end," The detective's gaze moved to Arthur. "The murderer is guided not just by the fear of loss but also by the prospect of revenge. Isn't that correct, Arthur?”

Arthur bristled, "It’s preposterous! I would never.."

"But you did, Arthur! You've had plenty of reasons. The neglect by your father, the expulsion from the family and the strain of financial hardships while your half-sister Esther lived in leisure. All backed with guns from your old military days?”

Arthur dropped his gaze, his silence a telltale admittance. 

"The estate was to pass on to Esther, then revert to Johnson and finally to Mary, eliminating you totally. So, you premeditated your sister's murder using your father's scandals as a smoke screen!"

Lady Margaret hurled her handkerchief at Arthur in agonized fury; Sir Reginald collapsed back into his chair, defeated and devastated. And with the final admission of Arthur's guilt, the bizarre puzzle of Esther Hugh's mysterious death was resolved, the sinister veils of twisted family love and avarices lifted off by the probing genius of Detective Phillip Harrison.