Scene 7:
The scene takes place in the grandiose drawing room of Holdenwood Manor. Detective Carlson, an astute and industrious investigator with a great sense of intuition, had gathered the guests present on the stormy night of Sir Maxwell's murder. 

Lady Margaret, Sir Maxwell’s aloof wife, sat on the faded chintz couch, her diamond earrings glinting in the firelight. Next to her, their sympathetic daughter, Isabelle, nervously claspicked her hands. Edwin, Sir Maxwell’s business partner and best friend, sat brooding in the corner. Victoria, the young and beautiful maid, lurked in the shadows, and Arthur, the disgruntled gardener, sneered from his chair.

"All of you," Detective Carlson began, fixing his earnest gaze onto each person, "had motive, means, and opportunity to murder Sir Maxwell.” He surveyed the room, allowing a moment of silence to amplify the tension. 

"Starting with you, Lady Margaret," he continued, "you were unhappy in a loveless marriage and stand to gain his fortune. His daughter, Isabelle, was due to be cut off financially. Edwin," he gestured to the businessman, "was rumored to be on the verge of a ruinous scandal, in which Sir Maxwell refused to shield him.” 

As he moved on to Victoria and Arthur, murmurs of denial and panic began to circulate around the room. "Victoria,” he pointed to the maid, “was entrapped in an illicit relationship with Sir Maxwell. Arthur was recently fired, thereby losing his livelihood over a trivial disagreement."

All eyes in the room darted towards each suspect as their motives were aired.

"But despite all these motives," continued Carlson triumphantly, "one thing stayed constant. A particular set of muddy boot prints leading to the Sir's study the night of the murder." 

He shot a knowing glance at Arthur. "Anyone could have created those boot prints, but the soil found at the crime scene was unique, laden with a rare mineral that is cultivated in this estate's gardens. And who would have access to such areas after hours?"

Arthur's face began to pale, shifting uncomfortably under Carlson's accusatory gaze. 

“Arthur,” Carlson announced solemnly, “You murdered Sir Maxwell.” The room echoed with gasps of disbelief. 

“You killed him because you felt scorned and wanted to inflict the same powerlessness onto him, the one who stripped you not only of your job but also of your self-respect."

Detective Carlson placed a photograph on the table. It was an image of a specialized gardener's boot, caked with the distinctive soil. "A boot print that matches your gardening boots, Arthur," he said, his voice just above a whisper. "It's over.”

Defeated, Arthur's defiant sneer faded into a look of desperation, the weight of his actions finally sinking in. Detective Carlson’s success in uncovering the truth stemmed not only from his keen observation but also his understanding of the intricate relationship dynamics amongst the characters, hence the classic scene of reveal and vindication in a detective story.