Scene 12:
The elegant drawing room sat silent and expectant with suspense as the rain thrashed against the glass panes. A hodgepodge assembly of characters, the remaining guests of the faded manor house, sat nervously, their glances darting to the cold, lifeless body laid out ceremoniously on the chaise longue, then back to the hard gaze of detective Phillip Kingston.

Kingston, a lean, unassuming man with hawk-like eyes, motioned to the body of Alfred Chesterfield, the family patriarch, killed by a single stroke of malice.

"As you all knew Mr. Alfred Chesterfield," Kingston began methodically, "you also knew him to be a man of many secrets. Secrets that, until his untimely death, remained his own."

Kingston circled the room, studying the faces of the suspects. There was Marjorie, Alfred's distant and seemingly uncaring wife; Edward, his hot-blooded and ambitious son; Eliza, the delicate yet mysterious governess, and the stoic butler, Hawkins.

"Tonight, the murderer believed they could capitalize on a house full of identities and motivations. However," Kingston paused, letting the tension rise, "I have assembled the facts, and they tell a very particular story."

He approached Marjorie. "It is true, Marjorie, you benefited from Alfred's death, financially speaking. But your relationship had fizzled out years ago. You lacked any real motive."

Marjorie nodded, a faint hint of relief in her eyes.

Next, he turned to Edward, who glared at him. "Edward, you craved your father's respect and position. But, as you learned tonight, he intended to disinherit you. That is ample motive. However, you were out on the grounds during the time of murder, witnessed by Scott, the stable boy."

Then, he moved towards Eliza. "Miss Eliza, you've seemed quite distressed by this, yet your reasons are unclear. You had no reason to want Alfred dead. But you possess a knowledge of botany, including poisonous plants, am I right?" 

She nodded, her face pale. "Yes. But I had no part in this."

Finally, he faced the butler. "Hawkins, you have been with the family for over two decades, and you discovered the body. You might say, you cared about Alfred as much as--or even more than--anyone here."

"Indeed, sir," Hawkins agreed, his voice steady.

Kingston withdrew an empty vial from his coat. “This contained nightshade, a plant well known for its poisonous properties and commonly found in this countryside. I found it in the butler's pantry."

Silence engulfed the room.

"Hawkins, Alfred was going to let you go after revealing his plans to sell the manor. In this desperate act, you chose to poison his brandy -- the only glass you always served to him personally."

"I...I..." Hawkins faltered.

"For love, respect, and fear of what the future held, you killed Alfred Chesterfield," Kingston declared, sending shivers down the spines of the remaining listeners. "The question of who had the opportunity, the knowledge, and the motive have all pointed me in your direction."

In the midst of aghast faces, Kingston concluded his revelation.