We were sitting in a state of tense attention to listen to Poirot’s final ex- 
planation of the case. 

“All along,” he said, “I have been worried over the why of this case. 
Hastings said to me the other day that the case was ended. I replied to 
him that the case was the man I The mystery was not the mystery of the 
murders , but the mystery of A.B.C. Why did he find it necessary to 
commit these murders? Why did he select me as his adversary? 

“It is no answer to say that the man was mentally unhinged. To say a 
man does mad things because he is mad is merely unintelligent and 
stupid. A madman is as logical and reasoned in his action as a sane 
man — given his peculiar biased point of view. For example, if a man 
insists on going out and squatting about in nothing but a loin cloth his 
conduct seems eccentric in the extreme. But once you know that the 
man himself is firmly convinced that he is Mahatma Gandhi , then his 
conduct becomes perfectly reasonable and logical. 

“What was necessary in this case was to imagine a mind so consti- 
tuted that it was logical and reasonable to commit four or more mur- 
ders and to announce them beforehand by letters written to Hercule 
Poirot. 

“My friend, Hastings, will tell you that from the moment I received 
the first letter I was upset and disturbed. It seemed to me at once that 
there was something very wrong about the letter.” 

“You were quite right,” said Franklin Clarke dryly. 

"Yes. But there, at the very start, I made a grave error. I permitted 
my feeling— my very strong feeling about the letter to remain a mere 
impression. I treated it as though it had been an intuition. In a well- 
balanced, reasoning mind there is no such thing as an intuition — an in- 
spired guess! You can guess, of course — and a guess is either right or 
wrong. If it is right you call it an intuition. If it is wrong you usually do 
not speak of it again. But what is often called an intuition is really an 
impression based on logical deduction or experience. When an expert 
feels that there is something wrong about a picture or a piece of furni- 
ture or the signature on a cheque he is really basing that feeling on a 
host of small signs and details. He has no need to go into them 
minutely — his experience obviates that — the net result is the definite 
impression that something is wrong. But it is not a guess , it is an im- 
pression based on experience. 

“Eh bien, I admit that I did not regard that first letter in the way I 
should. It just made me extremely uneasy. The police regarded it as a 
hoax. I myself took it seriously. I was convinced that a murder would 
take place in Andover as stated. As you know, a murder did take place. 

“There was no means at that point, as I well realized, of knowing 
who the person was who had done the deed. The only course open to 
me was to try and understand just what kind of a person had done it. 

“I had certain indications. The letter — the manner of the crime — the 
person murdered. What I had to discover was: the motive of the crime, 
the motive of the letter.” 

“Publicity,” suggested Clarke. 

“Surely an inferiority complex covers that,” added Thora Grey. 

“That was, of course, the obvious line to take. But why me? Why 
Hercule Poirot? Greater publicity could be ensured by sending the let- 
ters to Scotland Yard. More again by sending them to a newspaper. A 
newspaper might not print the first letter, but by the time the second 
crime took place, A.B.C. could have been assured of all the publicity 
the press could give. Why, then, Hercule Poirot? Was it for some per- 
sonal reason? There was, discernible in the letter, a slight antiforeign 
bias — but not enough to explain the matter to my satisfaction. 

“Then the second letter arrived — and was followed by the murder of 
Betty Barnard at Bexhill. It became clear now (what I had already sus- 
pected) that the murders were to proceed in an alphabetical plan, but 
that fact, which seemed final to most people, left the main question un- 
altered to my mind. Why did A.B.C. need to commit these murders?” 

Megan Barnard stirred in her chair. 

“Isn’t there such a thing as — as a blood lust?” she said. 

Poirot turned to her. 

“You are quite right, mademoiselle. There is such a thing. The lust 
to kill. But that did not quite fit the facts of the case. A homicidal ma- 
niac who desires to kill usually desires to kill as many victims as possi- 
ble . It is a recurring craving. The great idea of such a killer is to hide 
his tracks — not to advertise them. When we consider the four victims 
selected — or at any rate three of them (for I know very little of Mr. 
Downes or Mr. Earlsfield), we realize that if he had chosen , the mur- 
derer could have done away with them without incurring any suspi- 
cion. Franz Ascher, Donald Fraser or Megan Barnard, possibly Mr. 
Clarke — those are the people the police would have suspected even if 
they had been unable to get direct proof. An unknown homicidal mur- 
derer would not have been thought of! Why, then, did the murderer feel 
it necessary to call attention to himself? Was it the necessity of leaving 
on each body a copy of an A.B.C. railway guide? Was that the compul- 
sion? Was there some complex connected with the railway guide? 

“I found it quite inconceivable at this point to enter into the mind of 
the murderer. Surely it could not be magnanimity? A horror of respon- 
sibility for the crime being fastened on an innocent person? 

“Although I could not answer the main question, certain things I did 
feel I was learning about the murderer.” 

“Such as?” asked Fraser. 

‘To begin with — that he had a tabular mind. His crimes were listed 
by alphabetical progression — that was obviously important to him. On 
the other hand, he had no particular taste in victims — Mrs. Ascher, 
Betty Barnard, Sir Carmichael Clarke, they all differed widely from 
each other. There was no sex complex — no particular age complex, 
and that seemed to me to be a very curious fact. If a man kills indis- 
criminately it is usually because he removes any one who stands in his 
way or annoys him. But the alphabetical progression showed that such 
was not the case here. The other type of killer usually selects a partic- 
ular type of victim — nearly always of the opposite sex. There was 
something haphazard about the procedure of A.B.C. that seemed to me 
to be at war with the alphabetical selection. 

“The slight inferences I permitted myself to make. The choice of the 
A.B.C. suggested to me what I may call a railway-minded man . This is 
more common in men than women. Small boys love trains better than 
small girls do. It might be the sign, too, of an in some ways undevel- 
oped mind. The ‘boy’ motif still predominated. 

“The death of Betty Barnard and the manner of it gave me certain 
other indications. The manner of her death was particularly suggestive. 

(Forgive me, Mr. Fraser.) To begin with, she was strangled with her 
own belt — therefore she must almost certainly have been killed by 
some one with whom she was on friendly or affectionate terms. When 
I learnt something of her character a picture grew up in my mind. 

“Betty Barnard was a flirt. She liked attention from a personable 
male. Therefore A.B.C., to persuade her to come out with him, must 
have had a certain amount of attraction — of le sex appeal! He must be 
able, as you English say, to ‘get off.’ He must be capable of the click! I 
visualize the scene on the beach thus: the man admires her belt. She 
takes it off, he passes it playfully round her neck — says, perhaps, ‘I 
shall strangle you.’ It is all very playful. She giggles — and he pulls — ” 

Donald Fraser sprang up. He was livid. 

“M. Poirot — for God’s sake.” 

Poirot made a gesture. 

“It is finished. I say no more. It is over. We pass to the next murder, 
that of Sir Carmichael Clarke. Here the murderer goes back to his first 
method — the blow on the head. The same alphabetical complex — but 
one fact worries me a little. To be consistent the murderer should have 
chosen his towns in some definite sequence. 

“If Andover is the 155th name under A, then the B crime should be 
the 155th also — or it should be the 156th and the C the 157th. Here 
again the towns seemed to be chosen in rather too haphazard a fash- 
ion.” 

“Isn’t that because you’re rather biased on that subject, Poirot?” I 
suggested. “You yourself are normally methodical and orderly. It’s al- 
most a disease with you.” 

“No, it is not a disease! Quelle idee! But I admit that I may be 
over-stressing that point. Passons! 

“The Churston crime gave me very little extra help. We were un- 
lucky over it, since the letter announcing it went astray, hence no 
preparations could be made. 

“But by the time the D crime was announced, a very formidable sys- 
tem of defence had been evolved. It must have been obvious that 
A.B.C. could not much longer hope to get away with his crimes. 

“Moreover, it was at this point that the clue of the stockings came 
into my hands. It was perfectly clear that the presence of an individual 
selling stockings on and near the scene of each crime could not be a co- 
incidence. Hence the stocking-seller must be the murderer. I may say 
that his description, as given me by Miss Grey, did not quite corre- 
spond with my own picture of the man who strangled Betty Barnard. 

“I will pass over the next stages quickly. A fourth murder was committed — the murder of a man named George Earlsfield — it was 
supposed in mistake for a man named Downes, who was something of 
the same build and who was sitting near him in the cinema. 

“And now at last comes the turn of the tide . Events play against 
A.B.C. instead of into his hands. He is marked down — hunted — and at 
last arrested. 

“The case, as Hastings says, is ended! 

“True enough as far as, the public is concerned. The man is in prison 
and will eventually, no doubt, go to Broadmoor. There will be no more 
murders. Exit! Finis! R.I.P. 

u But not for me! 1 know nothing — nothing at all! Neither the why 
nor the wherefore. 

“And there is one small vexing fact. The man Gust has an alibi for 
the night of the Bexhill crime.” 

“That’s been worrying me all along,” said Franklin Clarke. 

“Yes. It worried me. For the alibi , it has the air of being genuine. But 
it cannot be genuine unless — and now we come to two very interesting 
speculations. 

“Supposing, my friends, that while Cust committed three of the 
crimes — the A, C and D crimes — he did not commit the B crime. ” 

“M. Poirot. It isn’t — ” 

Poirot silenced Megan Barnard with a look. 

“Be quiet, mademoiselle. I am for the truth, I am! I have done with 
lies. Supposing, I say, that A.B.C. did not commit the second crime. It 
took place, remember, in the early hours of the 25th — the day he had 
arrived for the crime. Supposing some one had forestalled him? What 
in those circumstances would he do? Commit a second murder, or lie 
low and accept the first as a kind of macabre present ?” 

“M. Poirot!” said Megan. “That’s a fantastic thought! All the crimes 
must have been committed by the same person!” 

He took no notice of her and went steadily on: 

“Such a hypothesis had the merit of explaining one fact — the dis- 
crepancy between the personality of Alexander Bonaparte Cust (who 
could never have made the click with any girl) and the personality of 
Betty Barnard's murderer. And it has been known, before now, that 
would-be murderers have taken advantage of the crimes committed by 
other people. Not all the crimes of Jack the Ripper were comhiitted 
by Jack the Ripper, for instance. So far, so good. 

“But then I came up against a definite difficulty. 

“Up to the time of the Barnard murder, no facts about the A.B.C. 
murders had been made public. The Andover murder had created little
interest. The incident of the open railway guide had not even been 
mentioned in the press. It therefore followed that whoever killed Betty 
Barnard must have had access to facts known only to certain 
persons — myself, the police, and certain relations and neighbours of 
Mrs. Ascher. 

“That line of research seemed to lead me up against a blank wall.” 

The faces that looked at him were blank too. Blank and puzzled. 

Donald Fraser said thoughtfully: 

“The police, after all, are human beings. And they're good-looking 
men — ” 

He stopped, looking at Poirot inquiringly. 

Poirot shook his head gently. 

“No — it is simpler than that. I told you that there was a second spec- 
ulation. 

“Supposing that Cust was not responsible for the killing of Betty 
Barnard? Supposing that some one else killed her. Could that some one 
else have been responsible for the other murders too?” 

“But that doesn't make sense!” cried Clarke. 

“Doesn’t it? I did then what 1 ought to have done at first I examined 
the letters I had received from a totally different point of view. I had 
felt from the beginning that there was something wrong with them — 
just as a picture expert knows a picture is wrong. . . . 

“I had assumed, without pausing to consider, that what was wrong 
with them was the fact that they were written by a madman. 

“Now I examined them again — and this time I came to a totally dif- 
ferent conclusion. What was wrong with them was the fact that they 
were written by a sane man!” 

“What?” I cried. 

“But yes — just that precisely! They were wrong as a picture is 
wrong — because they were a fake! They pretended to be the letters of a 
madman — of a homicidal lunatic, but in reality they were nothing of 
the kind.” 

“It doesn’t make sense,” Franklin Clarke repeated. 

“Mais si! One must reason — reflect. What would be the object of 
writing such letters? To focus attention on the writer, to call attention 
to the murders! En verite, it did not seem to make sense at first sight. 
And then I saw light. It was to focus attention on several murders — on a group of murders. 
Is it not your great Shakespeare who has said, 

‘You cannot see the trees for the wood’?” 

I did not correct Poirot’s literary reminiscences. I was trying to see 
his point. A glimmer came to me. He went on: “When do you notice a pin least? When it is in a pincushion! When 
do you notice an individual murder least? When it is one of a series of 
related murders. 

“I had to deal with an intensely clever, resourceful murderer — 
reckless, daring and a thorough gambler. Not Mr. Cust! He could never 
have committed these murders! No, I had to deal with a very different 
stamp of man — a man with a boyish temperament (witness the 
schoolboy-type letters and the railway guide), an attractive man to 
women, and a man with a ruthless disregard for human life, a man who 
was necessarily a prominent person in one of the crimes! Consider 
when a man or woman is killed, what are the questions that the police 
ask? Opportunity. Where was everybody at the time of the crime? Mo- 
tive. Who benefited by the deceased’s death? If the motive and the op- 
portunity are fairly obvious, what is a would-be murderer to do? Fake 
an aliibi — that is, manipulate time in some way? But that is always a 
hazardous proceeding. Our murderer thought of a more fantastic de- 
fence. Create a homicidal murderer! 

“I had now only to review the various crimes and find the possible 
guilty person. The Andover crime? The most likely suspect for that 
was Franz Ascher, but I could not imagine Ascher inventing and carry- 
ing out such an elaborate scheme, nor could I see him planning a pre- 
meditated murder. The Bexhill crime? Donald Fraser was a possibility. 
He had brains and ability, and a methodical turn of mind. But his mo- 
tive for killing his sweetheart could only be jealousy — and jealousy 
does not tend to premeditation. Also I learned that he had his holiday 
early in August, which rendered it unlikely that he had anything to do 
with the Churston crime. We come to the Churston crime next — and at 
once we are on infinitely more promising ground. 

“Sir Carmichael Clarke was an immensely wealthy man. Who in- 
herits his money? His wife, who is dying, has a life interest in it, and it 
then goes to his brother Franklin . ” 

Poirot turned slowly round till his eyes met those of Franklin Clarke. 

“I was quite sure then. The man I had known a long time in my se- 
cret mind was the same as the man whom I had known as a person. 
A.B.C . and Franklin Clarke were one and the same! The daring adven- 
turous character, the roving life, the partiality for England that had 
showed itself, very faintly, in the jeer at foreigners. The attractive free 
and easy manner — nothing easier for him than to pick up a girl in a 
cafe. The methodical tabular mind — he made a list here one day, ticked 
off over the headings A.B.C. — and finally, the boyish mind 
mentioned by Lady Clarke and even shown by his taste have ascertained that there is a book in the library called The Railway 
Children by E. Nesbit. I had no further doubt in my own mind — 
A.B.C., the man who wrote the letters and committed the crimes, was 
Franklin Clarke . ” 

Clarke suddenly burst out laughing. 

“Very ingenious! And what about our friend Cust, caught red- 
handed? What about the blood on his coat? And the knife he hid in his 
lodgings? He may deny he committed the crimes — ” 

Poirot interrupted. 

“You are quite wrong. He admits the fact.” 

“What?” Clarke looked really startled. 

“Oh, yes,” said Poirot gently. “I had no sooner spoken to him than I 
was aware that Cust believed himself to be guilty. ” 

“And even that didn’t satisfy M. Poirot?” said Clarke. 

“No. Because as soon as I saw him I also knew that he could not be 
guilty ! He has neither the nerve nor the daring — nor, I may add, the 
brains to plan! All along I have been aware of the dual personality of 
the murderer. Now I see wherein it consisted. Two people were 
involved — the real murderer, cunning, resourceful and daring — and 
the pseudo murderer, stupid, vacillating and suggestible. 

“Suggestible — it is in that word that the mystery of Mr. Cust con- 
sists! It was not enough for you, Mr. Clarke, to devise this plan of a se- 
ries to distract attention from a single crime. You had also to have a 
stalking horse. 

“I think the idea first originated in your mind as the result of a 
chance encounter in a city coffee den with this odd personality with his 
bombastic Christian names. You were at that time turning over in your 
mind various plans for the murder of your brother.” 

“Really? And why?” 

“Because you were seriously alarmed for the future. I do not know 
whether you realize it, Mr. Clarke, but you played into my hands when 
you showed me a certain letter written to you by your brother. In it he 
displayed very clearly his affection and absorption in Miss Thora Grey. 
His regard may have been a paternal one — or he may have preferred to 
think it so. Nevertheless, there was a very real danger that on the death 
of your sister-in-law he might, in his loneliness, turn to this beautiful 
girl for sympathy and comfort and it might end — as so often happens 
with elderly men — in his marrying her. Your fear was increased by 
your knowledge of Miss Grey. You are, I fancy, an excellent, if some- 
what cynical judge of character. You judged, whether correctly or not, 
that Miss Grey was a type of young woman ‘on the make.’ You had no doubt that she would jump at the chance of becoming Lady Clarke. 
Your brother was an extremely healthy and vigorous man. There might 
be children and your chance of inheriting your brother’s wealth would 
vanish. 

“You have been, I fancy, in essence a disappointed man all your life. 
You have been the roiling stone — and you have gathered very little 
moss. You were bitterly jealous of your brother’s wealth. 

“I repeat then that, turning over various schemes in your mind, your 
meeting with Mr. Cust gave you an idea. His bombastic Christian 
names, his account of his epileptic seizures and of his headaches, his 
whole shrinking and insignificant personality, struck you as fitting him 
for the tool you wanted. The whole alphabetical plan sprang into your 
mind — Cusf s initials — the fact that your brother’s name began with a 
C and that he lived at Churston were the nucleus of the scheme. You 
even went so far as to hint to Cust at his possible end— though you 
could hardly hope that that suggestion would bear the rich fruit that it 
did! 

“Your arrangements were excellent. In Cusf s name you wrote for a 
large consignment of hosiery to be sent to him. You yourself sent a 
number of A.B.C.’s looking like a similar parcel. You wrote to 
hi m — a typed letter purporting to be from the same firm offering him 
a good salary and commission. Your plans were so well laid before- 
hand that you typed all the letters that were sent subsequently, and then 
presented him with the machine on which they had been typed l 

“You had now to look about for two victims whose names began 
with A and B respectively and who lived at places also beginning with 
those same letters. 

“You hit on Andover as quite a likely spot and your preliminary re- 
connaissance there led you to select Mrs. Ascher’s shop as the scene of 
the first crime. Her name was written clearly over the door, and you 
found by experiment that she was usually alone in the shop. Her mur- 
der needed nerve, daring and reasonable luck. 

“For the letter B you had to vary your tactics. Lonely women in 
shops might conceivably have been warned. I should imagine that you 
frequented a few cafes and teashops, laughing and joking with the girls 
there and finding out whose name began with the right letter and who 
would be suitable for your purpose. 

“In Betty Barnard you found just the type of girl you were looking 
for. You took her out once or twice, explaining to her that you were a 
married man, and that outings must therefore take place in a somewhat 
hole and comer manner.

“Then, your preliminary plans completed, you set to work! You sent 
the Andover list to Cust, directing him to go there on a certain date, 
and you sent off the first A.B.C. letter to me. 

“On the appointed day, you went to Andover — and killed Mrs. 
Ascher— without anything occurring to damage your plans. 

“Murder No. 1 was successfully accomplished. 

“For the second murder, you took the precaution of committing it, in 
reality, the day before. I am fairly certain that Betty Barnard was killed 
well before midnight on the 24th July. 

“We now come to murder No. 3 — the important — in fact, the real 
murder from your point of view. 

“And here a full meed of praise is due to Hastings, who made a sim- 
ple and obvious remark to which no attention was paid. 

“He suggested that the third letter went astray intentionally! 

“And he was right! . . . 

“In that one simple fact lies the answer to the question that has puz- 
zled me so all along. Why were the letters addressed in the first place 
to Hercule Poirot, a private detective, and not to the police? 

“Erroneously I imagined some personal reason. 

“Not at all! The letters were sent to me because the essence of your 
plan was that one of them should be wrongly addressed and go 
astray — but you cannot arrange for a letter addressed to the Criminal 
Investigation Department of Scotland Yard to go astray! It is necessary 
to have a private address. You chose me as a fairly well-known person, 
and a person who was sure to take the letters to the police — and also, in 
your rather insular mind, you enjoyed scoring off a foreigner. 

“You addressed your envelope very cleverly — Whitehaven — 
Whitehorse — quite a natural slip. Only Hastings was sufficiently per- 
spicacious to disregard subtleties and go straight for the obvious! 

“Of course the letter was meant to go astray! The police were to be 
set on the trail only when the murder was safely over. Your brother’s 
nightly walk provided you with the opportunity. And so successfully 
had the A.B.C. terror taken hold on the public mind that the possibility 
of your guilt never occurred to any one. 

“After the death of your brother, of course, your object was accom- 
plished. You had no wish to commit any more murders. On the other 
hand, if the murders stopped without reason, a suspicion of truth might 
come to some one. 

“Your stalking horse, Mr. Cust, had so successfully lived up to his 
role of the invisible — because insignificant — man, that so far no one 
had noticed that the same person had been seen in the vicinity of the 
three murders! To your annoyance, even his visit to Combeside had not 
been mentioned. The matter had passed completely out of Miss Grey’s 
head. 

“Always daring, you decided that one more murder must take place 
but that this time the trail must be well blazed. 

“You selected Doncaster for the scene of operations. 

“Your plan was very simple. You yourself would be on the scene in 
the nature of things. Mr. Gust would be ordered to Doncaster by his 
firm. Your plan was to follow him round and trust to opportunity. Ev- 
erything fell out well. Mr. Gust went to a cinema. That was simplicity 
itself. You sat a few seats away from him. When he got up to go, you 
did the same. You pretended to stumble, leaned over and stabbed a 
dozing man in the row in front, slid the A.B.C. on to his knees and 
managed to collide heavily with Mr. Gust in the darkened doorway, 
wiping the knife on his sleeve and slipping it into his pocket. 

“You were not in the least at pains to choose a victim whose name 
began with D. Any one would do! You assumed — and quite rightly — 
that it would be considered to be a mistake . There was sure to be some 
one whose name began with D not far off in the audience. It would be 
assumed that he had been intended to be the victim. 

“And now, my friends, let us consider the matter from the point of 
view of the false A.B.C. — from the point of view of Mr. Cust. 

“The Andover crime means nothing to him. He is shocked and sur- 
prised by the Bexhill crime — why, he himself was there about the 
time! Then comes the Churston crime and the headlines in the newspa- 
pers. An A.B.C. crime at Andover when he was there, an A.B.C. crime 

at Bexhill, and now another close by Three crimes and he has been 

at the scene of each of them. Persons suffering from epilepsy often 
have blanks when they cannot remember what they have done Re- 

member that Cust was a nervous, highly neurotic subject and ex- 
tremely suggestible. 

‘Then he receives the order to go to Doncaster. 

“Doncaster! And the next A.B.C. crime is to be in Doncaster. He 
must have felt as though it was fate. He loses his nerve, fancies his 
landlady is looking at him suspiciously, and tells her he is going to 
Cheltenham. 

“He goes to Doncaster because it is his duty. In the afternoon he 
goes to a cinema. Possibly he dozes off for a minute or two. 

“Imagine his feelings when on his return to his inn he discovers that 
there is blood on his coat sleeve and a bloodstained knife in his pocket. 
All his vague forebodings leap into certainty. 
“He — he himself— is the killer! He remembers his headaches — his 
lapses of memory. He is quite sure of the truth — he, Alexander Bona- 
parte Cust, is a homicidal lunatic. 

“His conduct after that is the conduct of a hunted animal. He gets 
back to his lodgings in London. He is safe there — known. They think 
he has been in Cheltenham. He has the knife with him still — a thor- 
oughly stupid thing to do, of course. He hides it behind the hall stand. 

“Then, one day, he is warned that the police are coming. It is the 
end! They know! 

“The hunted animal does his last run 

“I do not know why he went to Andover — a morbid desire, I think, 
to go and look at the place where the crime was committed — the crime 
he committed though he can remember nothing about it 

“He has no money left — he is worn out . . . his feet lead him of his 
own accord to the police station. 

“But even a cornered beast will fight. Mr. Cust fully believes that he 
did the murders but he sticks strongly to his plea of innocence. And he 
holds with desperation to that alibi for the second murder. At least that 
cannot be laid to his door. 

“As I say, when I saw him, I knew at once that he was not the mur- 
derer and that my name meant nothing to him. I knew too, that he 
thought himself the murderer! 

“After he had confessed his guilt to me, I knew more strongly than 
ever that my own theory was right.” 

“Your theory,” said Franklin Clarke, “is absurd!” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“No, Mr. Clarke. You were safe enough so long as no one suspected 
you . Once you were suspected proofs were easy to obtain.” 

“Proofs?” 

“Yes, I found the stick that you used in the Andover and Churston 
murders in a cupboard at Combeside. An ordinary stick with a thick 
knob handle. A section of wood had been removed and melted lead 
poured in. Your photograph was picked out from half a dozen others by 
two people who saw you leaving the cinema when you were supposed 
to be on the race-course at Doncaster. You were identified at Bexhill 
the other day by Milly Higley and a girl from the Scarlet Runner Road- 
house, where you took Betty Barnard to dine on the fatal evening. And 
finally — most damning of all — you overlooked a most elementary pre- 
caution. You left a fingerprint on Cust’s typewriter — the typewriter 
that, if you are innocent, you could never have handled. ” 

Clarke sat quite still for a minute, then he said: 

“Rouge, impair, manque ! — you win, M. Poirot! But it was worth 
trying!” 

With an incredibly rapid motion, he whipped out a small automatic 
from his pocket and held it to his head.