Still beaming, Poirot marshalled us all into the drawingroom, bringing
forward chairs as he did so.
Miss Howardhere. Mademoiselle Cynthia. Monsieur Lawrence. The good
Dorcas. And Annie. Bien! We must delay our proceedings a few minutes
until Mr. Inglethorp arrives. I have sent him a note.
Miss Howard rose immediately from her seat.
If that man comes into the house, I leave it!
No, no! Poirot went up to her and pleaded in a low voice.
Finally Miss Howard consented to return to her chair. A few minutes
later Alfred Inglethorp entered the room.
The company once assembled, Poirot rose from his seat with the air of a
popular lecturer, and bowed politely to his audience.
Messieurs, mesdames, as you all know, I was called in by Monsieur
John Cavendish to investigate this case. I at once examined the bedroom
of the deceased which, by the advice of the doctors, had been kept
locked, and was consequently exactly as it had been when the tragedy
occurred. I found: first, a fragment of green material; second, a stain
on the carpet near the window, still damp; thirdly, an empty box of
bromide powders.
To take the fragment of green material first, I found it caught in the
bolt of the communicating door between that room and the adjoining one
occupied by Mademoiselle Cynthia. I handed the fragment over to the
police who did not consider it of much importance. Nor did they
recognize it for what it was: a piece torn from a green land armlet.
There was a little stir of excitement.
Now there was only one person at Styles who worked on the land: Mrs.
Cavendish. Therefore it must have been Mrs. Cavendish who entered the
deceased's room through the door communicating with Mademoiselle
Cynthias room.
But that door was bolted on the inside! I cried.
When I examined the room, yes. But in the first place we have only her
word for it, since it was she who tried that particular door and
reported it fastened. In the ensuing confusion she would have had ample
opportunity to shoot the bolt across. I took an early opportunity of
verifying my conjectures. To begin with, the fragment corresponds
exactly with a tear in Mrs. Cavendishs armlet. Also, at the inquest,
Mrs. Cavendish declared that she had heard, from her own room, the fall
of the table by the bed. I took an early opportunity of testing that
statement by stationing my friend Monsieur Hastings in the left wing of
the building, just outside Mrs. Cavendishs door. I myself, in company
with the police, went to the deceased's room, and whilst there I,
apparently accidentally, knocked over the table in question, but found
that, as I had expected, Monsieur Hastings had heard no sound at all.
This confirmed my belief that Mrs. Cavendish was not speaking the truth
when she declared that she had been dressing in her room at the time of
the tragedy. In fact, I was convinced that, far from having been in her
own room, Mrs. Cavendish was actually in the deceased's room when the
alarm was given.
I shot a quick glance at Mary. She was very pale, but smiling.
I proceeded to reason on that assumption. Mrs. Cavendish is in her
motherinlaw's room. We will say that she is seeking for something and
has not yet found it. Suddenly Mrs. Inglethorp awakens and is seized
with an alarming paroxysm. She flings out her arm, overturning the bed
table, and then pulls desperately at the bell. Mrs. Cavendish,
startled, drops her candle, scattering the grease on the carpet. She
picks it up, and retreats quickly to Mademoiselle Cynthias room,
closing the door behind her. She hurries out into the passage, for the
servants must not find her where she is. But it is too late! Already
footsteps are echoing along the gallery which connects the two wings.
What can she do? Quick as thought, she hurries back to the young girls
room, and starts shaking her awake. The hastily aroused household come
trooping down the passage. They are all busily battering at Mrs.
Inglethorps door. It occurs to nobody that Mrs. Cavendish has not
arrived with the rest, but——and this is significant——I can find no one
who saw her come from the other wing. He looked at Mary Cavendish. Am
I right, madame?
She bowed her head.
Quite right, monsieur. You understand that, if I had thought I would
do my husband any good by revealing these facts, I would have done so.
But it did not seem to me to bear upon the question of his guilt or
innocence.
In a sense, that is correct, madame. But it cleared my mind of many
misconceptions, and left me free to see other facts in their true
significance.
The will! cried Lawrence. Then it was you, Mary, who destroyed the
will?
She shook her head, and Poirot shook his also.
No, he said quietly. There is only one person who could possibly
have destroyed that will: Mrs. Inglethorp herself!
Impossible! I exclaimed. She had only made it out that very
afternoon!
Nevertheless, mon ami, it was Mrs. Inglethorp. Because, in no other
way can you account for the fact that, on one of the hottest days of
the year, Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire to be lighted in her room.
I gave a gasp. What idiots we had been never to think of that fire as
being incongruous! Poirot was continuing:
The temperature on that day, messieurs, was 80 degrees in the shade.
Yet Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire! Why? Because she wished to destroy
something, and could think of no other way. You will remember that, in
consequence of the War economics practiced at Styles, no waste paper
was thrown away. There was therefore no means of destroying a thick
document such as a will. The moment I heard of a fire being lighted in
Mrs. Inglethorps room, I leaped to the conclusion that it was to
destroy some important document——possibly a will. So the discovery of
the charred fragment in the grate was no surprise to me. I did not, of
course, know at the time that the will in question had only been made
this afternoon, and I will admit that, when I learnt that fact, I fell
into a grievous error. I came to the conclusion that Mrs. Inglethorps
determination to destroy her will arose as a direct consequence of the
quarrel she had that afternoon, and that therefore the quarrel took
place after, and not before the making of the will.
Here, as we know, I was wrong, and I was forced to abandon that idea.
I faced the problem from a new standpoint. Now, at four oclock, Dorcas
overheard her mistress saying angrily: You need not think that any
fear of publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.
I conjectured, and conjectured rightly, that these words were
addressed, not to her husband, but to Mr. John Cavendish. At five
oclock, an hour later, she uses almost the same words, but the
standpoint is different. She admits to Dorcas, I dont know what to
do; scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing. At four
oclock she has been angry, but completely mistress of herself. At five
oclock she is in violent distress, and speaks of having had a great
shock.
Looking at the matter psychologically, I drew one deduction which I
was convinced was correct. The second scandal she spoke of was not
the same as the first, and it concerned herself!
Let us reconstruct. At four oclock, Mrs. Inglethorp quarrels with her
son, and threatens to denounce him to his wife, who, by the way,
overheard the greater part of the conversation. At fourthirty, Mrs.
Inglethorp, in consequence of a conversation on the validity of wills,
makes a will in favour of her husband, which the two gardeners witness.
At five oclock, Dorcas finds her mistress in a state of considerable
agitation, with a slip of papera letter, Dorcas thinks, in her hand,
and it is then that she orders the fire in her room to be lighted.
Presumably, then, between fourthirty and five oclock, something has
occurred to occasion a complete revolution of feeling, since she is now
as anxious to destroy the will, as she was before to make it. What was
that something?
As far as we know, she was quite alone during that halfhour. Nobody
entered or left that boudoir. What then occasioned this sudden change
of sentiment?
One can only guess, but I believe my guess to be correct. Mrs.
Inglethorp had no stamps in her desk. We know this, because later she
asked Dorcas to bring her some. Now in the opposite corner of the room
stood her husbands desk, locked. She was anxious to find some stamps,
and, according to my theory, she tried her own keys in the desk. That
one of them fitted I know. She therefore opened the desk, and in
searching for the stamps she came across something else: that slip of
paper which Dorcas saw in her hand, and which assuredly was never meant
for Mrs. Inglethorp's eyes. On the other hand, Mrs. Cavendish believed
that the slip of paper to which her motherinlaw clung so tenaciously
was a written proof of her own husband's infidelity. She demanded it
from Mrs. Inglethorp who assured her, quite truly, that it had nothing
to do with that matter. Mrs. Cavendish did not believe her. She thought
that Mrs. Inglethorp was shielding her stepson. Now Mrs. Cavendish is a
very resolute woman, and, behind her mask of reserve, she was madly
jealous of her husband. She determined to get hold of that paper at all
costs, and in this resolution chance came to her aid. She happened to
pick up the key of Mrs. Inglethorp;s despatch case, which had been lost
that morning. She knew that her motherinlaw invariably kept all
important papers in this particular case.
Mrs. Cavendish, therefore, made her plans as only a woman driven
desperate through jealousy could have done. Some time in the evening
she unbolted the door leading into Mademoiselle Cynthia's room.
Possibly she applied oil to the hinges, for I found that it opened
quite noiselessly when I tried it. She put off her project until the
early hours of the morning as being safer, since the servants were
accustomed to hearing her move about her room at that time. She dressed
completely in her land kit, and made her way quietly through
Mademoiselle Cynthia's room into that of Mrs. Inglethorp.
He paused a moment, and Cynthia interrupted:
But I should have woken up if anyone had come through my room?
Not if you were drugged, mademoiselle.
Drugged?
Mais, oui!
You remember (he addressed us collectively again) that through all the
tumult and noise next door Mademoiselle Cynthia slept. That admitted of
two possibilities. Either her sleep was feigned, which I did not
believe, or her unconsciousness was induced by artificial means.
With this latter idea in my mind, I examined all the coffeecups most
carefully, remembering that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had brought
Mademoiselle Cynthia her coffee the night before. I took a sample from
each cup, and had them analysed with no result. I had counted the cups
carefully, in the event of one having been removed. Six persons had
taken coffee, and six cups were duly found. I had to confess myself
mistaken.
Then I discovered that I had been guilty of a very grave oversight.
Coffee had been brought in for seven persons, not six, for Dr.
Bauerstein had been there that evening. This changed the face of the
whole affair, for there was now one cup missing. The servants noticed
nothing, since Annie, the housemaid, who took in the coffee, brought in
seven cups, not knowing that Mr. Inglethorp never drank it, whereas
Dorcas, who cleared them away the following morning, found six as
usual——or strictly speaking she found five, the sixth being the one
found broken in Mrs. Inglethorps room.
I was confident that the missing cup was that of Mademoiselle Cynthia.
I had an additional reason for that belief in the fact that all the
cups found contained sugar, which Mademoiselle Cynthia never took in
her coffee. My attention was attracted by the story of Annie about some
salt on the tray of cocoa which she took every night to Mrs.
Inglethorp's room. I accordingly secured a sample of that cocoa, and
sent it to be analysed.
But that had already been done by Dr. Bauerstein, said Lawrence
quickly.
Not exactly. The analyst was asked by him to report whether strychnine
was, or was not, present. He did not have it tested, as I did, for a
narcotic.
For a narcotic?
Yes. Here is the analysts report. Mrs. Cavendish administered a safe,
but effectual, narcotic to both Mrs. Inglethorp and Mademoiselle
Cynthia. And it is possible that she had a mauvais quart d'heure in
consequence! Imagine her feelings when her motherinlaw is suddenly
taken ill and dies, and immediately after she hears the word Poison!
She has believed that the sleeping draught she administered was
perfectly harmless, but there is no doubt that for one terrible moment
she must have feared that Mrs. Inglethorps death lay at her door. She
is seized with panic, and under its influence she hurries downstairs,
and quickly drops the coffeecup and saucer used by Mademoiselle
Cynthia into a large brass vase, where it is discovered later by
Monsieur Lawrence. The remains of the cocoa she dare not touch. Too
many eyes are upon her. Guess at her relief when strychnine is
mentioned, and she discovers that after all the tragedy is not her
doing.
We are now able to account for the symptoms of strychnine poisoning
being so long in making their appearance. A narcotic taken with
strychnine will delay the action of the poison for some hours.
Poirot paused. Mary looked up at him, the colour slowly rising in her
face.
All you have said is quite true, Monsieur Poirot. It was the most
awful hour of my life. I shall never forget it. But you are wonderful.
I understand now.
What I meant when I told you that you could safely confess to Papa
Poirot, eh? But you would not trust me.
I see everything now, said Lawrence. The drugged cocoa, taken on top
of the poisoned coffee, amply accounts for the delay.
Exactly. But was the coffee poisoned, or was it not? We come to a
little difficulty here, since Mrs. Inglethorp never drank it.
What? The cry of surprise was universal.
No. You will remember my speaking of a stain on the carpet in Mrs.
Inglethorps room? There were some peculiar points about that stain. It
was still damp, it exhaled a strong odour of coffee, and imbedded in
the nap of the carpet I found some little splinters of china. What had
happened was plain to me, for not two minutes before I had placed my
little case on the table near the window, and the table, tilting up,
had deposited it upon the floor on precisely the identical spot. In
exactly the same way, Mrs. Inglethorp had laid down her cup of coffee
on reaching her room the night before, and the treacherous table had
played her the same trick.
What happened next is mere guess work on my part, but I should say
that Mrs. Inglethorp picked up the broken cup and placed it on the
table by the bed. Feeling in need of a stimulant of some kind, she
heated up her cocoa, and drank it off then and there. Now we are faced
with a new problem. We know the cocoa contained no strychnine. The
coffee was never drunk. Yet the strychnine must have been administered
between seven and nine oclock that evening. What third medium was
there——a medium so suitable for disguising the taste of strychnine that
it is extraordinary no one has thought of it? Poirot looked round the
room, and then answered himself impressively. Her medicine!
Do you mean that the murderer introduced the strychnine into her
tonic? I cried.
There was no need to introduce it. It was already there in the
mixture. The strychnine that killed Mrs. Inglethorp was the identical
strychnine prescribed by Dr. Wilkins. To make that clear to you, I will
read you an extract from a book on dispensing which I found in the
Dispensary of the Red Cross Hospital at Tadminster:
The following prescription has become famous in text books:
 Strychninae Sulph. . . . . . 1 gr.
 Potass Bromide . . . . . . . 3vi
 Aqua ad. . . . . . . . . . . . . 3viii
 Fiat Mistura
This solution deposits in a few hours the greater part of the
strychnine salt as an insoluble bromide in transparent crystals. A lady
in England lost her life by taking a similar mixture: the precipitated
strychnine collected at the bottom, and in taking the last dose she
swallowed nearly all of it!
Now there was, of course, no bromide in Dr. Wilkins prescription, but
you will remember that I mentioned an empty box of bromide powders. One
or two of those powders introduced into the full bottle of medicine
would effectually precipitate the strychnine, as the book describes,
and cause it to be taken in the last dose. You will learn later that
the person who usually poured out Mrs. Inglethorps medicine was always
extremely careful not to shake the bottle, but to leave the sediment at
the bottom of it undisturbed.
Throughout the case, there have been evidences that the tragedy was
intended to take place on Monday evening. On that day, Mrs.
Inglethorps bell wire was neatly cut, and on Monday evening
Mademoiselle Cynthia was spending the night with friends, so that Mrs.
Inglethorp would have been quite alone in the right wing, completely
shut off from help of any kind, and would have died, in all
probability, before medical aid could have been summoned. But in her
hurry to be in time for the village entertainment Mrs. Inglethorp
forgot to take her medicine, and the next day she lunched away from
home, so that the last and fatal dose was actually taken twentyfour
hours later than had been anticipated by the murderer; and it is owing
to that delay that the final proof——the last link of the chain——is now in
my hands.
Amid breathless excitement, he held out three thin strips of paper.
A letter in the murderer's own handwriting, mes amis! Had it been a
little clearer in its terms, it is possible that Mrs. Inglethorp,
warned in time, would have escaped. As it was, she realized her danger,
but not the manner of it.
In the deathly silence, Poirot pieced together the slips of paper and,
clearing his throat, read:
Dearest Evelyn:
 You will be anxious at hearing nothing. It is all right, only it
 will be tonight instead of last night. You understand. There's a
 good time coming once the old woman is dead and out of the way. No
 one can possibly bring home the crime to me. That idea of yours
 about the bromides was a stroke of genius! But we must be very
 circumspect. A false step——
Here, my friends, the letter breaks off. Doubtless the writer was
interrupted; but there can be no question as to his identity. We all
know this handwriting and
A howl that was almost a scream broke the silence.
You devil! How did you get it?
A chair was overturned. Poirot skipped nimbly aside. A quick movement
on his part, and his assailant fell with a crash.
Messieurs, mesdames, said Poirot, with a flourish, let me
introduce you to the murderer, Mr. Alfred Inglethorp!
CHAPTER XIII.
POIROT EXPLAINS
Poirot, you old villain, I said, I've half a mind to strangle you!
What do you mean by deceiving me as you have done?
We were sitting in the library. Several hectic days lay behind us. In
the room below, John and Mary were together once more, while Alfred
Inglethorp and Miss Howard were in custody. Now at last, I had Poirot
to myself, and could relieve my still burning curiosity.
Poirot did not answer me for a moment, but at last he said:
I did not deceive you, mon ami. At most, I permitted you to deceive
yourself.
Yes, but why?
Well, it is difficult to explain. You see, my friend, you have a
nature so honest, and a countenance so transparent, that, enfin, to
conceal your feelings is impossible! If I had told you my ideas, the
very first time you saw Mr. Alfred Inglethorp that astute gentleman
would have, in your so expressive idiom, smelt a rat! And then,
bonjour to our chances of catching him!
I think that I have more diplomacy than you give me credit for.
My friend, besought Poirot, I implore you, do not enrage yourself!
Your help has been of the most invaluable. It is but the extremely
beautiful nature that you have, which made me pause.
Well, I grumbled, a little mollified. I still think you might have
given me a hint.
But I did, my friend. Several hints. You would not take them. Think
now, did I ever say to you that I believed John Cavendish guilty? Did I
not, on the contrary, tell you that he would almost certainly be
acquitted?
Yes, but——
And did I not immediately afterwards speak of the difficulty of
bringing the murderer to justice? Was it not plain to you that I was
speaking of two entirely different persons?
No, I said, it was not plain to me!
Then again, continued Poirot, at the beginning, did I not repeat to
you several times that I didn't want Mr. Inglethorp arrested now?
That should have conveyed something to you.
Do you mean to say you suspected him as long ago as that?
Yes. To begin with, whoever else might benefit by Mrs. Inglethorp's
death, her husband would benefit the most. There was no getting away
from that. When I went up to Styles with you that first day, I had no
idea as to how the crime had been committed, but from what I knew of
Mr. Inglethorp I fancied that it would be very hard to find anything to
connect him with it. When I arrived at the chateau, I realized at once
that it was Mrs. Inglethorp who had burnt the will; and there, by the
way, you cannot complain, my friend, for I tried my best to force on
you the significance of that bedroom fire in midsummer.
Yes, yes, I said impatiently. Go on.
Well, my friend, as I say, my views as to Mr. Inglethorps guilt were
very much shaken. There was, in fact, so much evidence against him that
I was inclined to believe that he had not done it.
When did you change your mind?
When I found that the more efforts I made to clear him, the more
efforts he made to get himself arrested. Then, when I discovered that
Inglethorp had nothing to do with Mrs. Raikes and that in fact it was
John Cavendish who was interested in that quarter, I was quite sure.
But why?
Simply this. If it had been Inglethorp who was carrying on an intrigue
with Mrs. Raikes, his silence was perfectly comprehensible. But, when I
discovered that it was known all over the village that it was John who
was attracted by the farmers pretty wife, his silence bore quite a
different interpretation. It was nonsense to pretend that he was afraid
of the scandal, as no possible scandal could attach to him. This
attitude of his gave me furiously to think, and I was slowly forced to
the conclusion that Alfred Inglethorp wanted to be arrested. Eh bien!
from that moment, I was equally determined that he should not be
arrested.
Wait a minute. I don't see why he wished to be arrested?
Because, mon ami, it is the law of your country that a man once
acquitted can never be tried again for the same offence. Aha! but it
was clever, his idea! Assuredly, he is a man of method. See here, he
knew that in his position he was bound to be suspected, so he conceived
the exceedingly clever idea of preparing a lot of manufactured evidence
against himself. He wished to be arrested. He would then produce his
irreproachable alibi and, hey presto, he was safe for life!
But I still don't see how he managed to prove his alibi, and yet go to
the chemist's shop?
Poirot stared at me in surprise.
Is it possible? My poor friend! You have not yet realized that it was
Miss Howard who went to the chemist's shop?
Miss Howard?
But, certainly. Who else? It was most easy for her. She is of a good
height, her voice is deep and manly; moreover, remember, she and
Inglethorp are cousins, and there is a distinct resemblance between
them, especially in their gait and bearing. It was simplicity itself.
They are a clever pair!
I am still a little fogged as to how exactly the bromide business was
done, I remarked.
Bon! I will reconstruct for you as far as possible. I am inclined to
think that Miss Howard was the master mind in that affair. You remember
her once mentioning that her father was a doctor? Possibly she
dispensed his medicines for him, or she may have taken the idea from
one of the many books lying about when Mademoiselle Cynthia was
studying for her exam. Anyway, she was familiar with the fact that the
addition of a bromide to a mixture containing strychnine would cause
the precipitation of the latter. Probably the idea came to her quite
suddenly. Mrs. Inglethorp had a box of bromide powders, which she
occasionally took at night. What could be easier than quietly to
dissolve one or more of those powders in Mrs. Inglethorps large sized
bottle of medicine when it came from Coots? The risk is practically
nil. The tragedy will not take place until nearly a fortnight later. If
anyone has seen either of them touching the medicine, they will have
forgotten it by that time. Miss Howard will have engineered her
quarrel, and departed from the house. The lapse of time, and her
absence, will defeat all suspicion. Yes, it was a clever idea! If they
had left it alone, it is possible the crime might never have been
brought home to them. But they were not satisfied. They tried to be too
clever, and that was their undoing.
Poirot puffed at his tiny cigarette, his eyes fixed on the ceiling.
They arranged a plan to throw suspicion on John Cavendish, by buying
strychnine at the village chemists, and signing the register in his
handwriting.
On Monday Mrs. Inglethorp will take the last dose of her medicine. On
Monday, therefore, at six oclock, Alfred Inglethorp arranges to be
seen by a number of people at a spot far removed from the village. Miss
Howard has previously made up a cock and bull story about him and Mrs.
Raikes to account for his holding his tongue afterwards. At six
oclock, Miss Howard, disguised as Alfred Inglethorp, enters the
chemists shop, with her story about a dog, obtains the strychnine, and
writes the name of Alfred Inglethorp in Johns handwriting, which she
had previously studied carefully.
But, as it will never do if John, too, can prove an alibi, she writes
him an anonymous note, still copying his handwriting, which takes him to
a remote spot where it is exceedingly unlikely that anyone will see
him.
So far, all goes well. Miss Howard goes back to Middlingham. Alfred
Inglethorp returns to Styles. There is nothing that can compromise him
in any way, since it is Miss Howard who has the strychnine, which,
after all, is only wanted as a blind to throw suspicion on John
Cavendish.
But now a hitch occurs. Mrs. Inglethorp does not take her medicine
that night. The broken bell, Cynthia's absence, arranged by Inglethorp
through his wife, all these are wasted. And then he makes his slip.
Mrs. Inglethorp is out, and he sits down to write to his accomplice,
who, he fears, may be in a panic at the nonsuccess of their plan. It
is probable that Mrs. Inglethorp returned earlier than he expected.
Caught in the act, and somewhat flurried he hastily shuts and locks his
desk. He fears that if he remains in the room he may have to open it
again, and that Mrs. Inglethorp might catch sight of the letter before
he could snatch it up. So he goes out and walks in the woods, little
dreaming that Mrs. Inglethorp will open his desk, and discover the
incriminating document.
But this, as we know, is what happened. Mrs. Inglethorp reads it, and
becomes aware of the perfidy of her husband and Evelyn Howard, though,
unfortunately, the sentence about the bromides conveys no warning to
her mind. She knows that she is in danger, but is ignorant of where the
danger lies. She decides to say nothing to her husband, but sits down
and writes to her solicitor, asking him to come on the morrow, and she
also determines to destroy immediately the will which she has just
made. She keeps the fatal letter.