I will take you the way that I have traveled myself. Step by step
you shall accompany me, and see for yourself that all the facts point
indisputably to one person. Now, to begin with, there were two facts
and one little discrepancy in time which especially attracted my
attention. The first fact was the telephone call. If Ralph Paton were
indeed the murderer, the telephone call became meaningless and absurd.
Therefore, I said to myself, Ralph Paton is not the murderer.
I satisfied myself that the call could not have been sent by any one
in the house, yet I was convinced that it was amongst those present
on the fatal evening that I had to look for my criminal. Therefore I
concluded that the telephone call must have been sent by an accomplice.
I was not quite pleased with that deduction, but I let it stand for the
minute.
I next examined the motive for the call. That was difficult. I could
only get at it by judging its result. Which was that the murder was
discovered that night instead of in all probability the following
morning. You agree with that?
Yes, I admitted. Yes. As you say, Mr. Ackroyd, having given orders
that he was not to be disturbed, nobody would have been likely to go to
the study that night.
Tres bien. The affair marches, does it not? But matters were
still obscure. What was the advantage of having the crime discovered
that night in preference to the following morning? The only idea I
could get hold of was that the murderer, knowing the crime was to be
discovered at a certain time, could make sure of being present when the
door was broken in, or at any rate immediately afterwards. And now we
come to the second fact: the chair pulled out from the wall. Inspector
Raglan dismissed that as of no importance. I, on the contrary, have
always regarded it as of supreme importance.
In your manuscript you have drawn a neat little plan of the study.
If you had it with you this minute you would see that the chair, being
drawn out in the position indicated by Parker, would stand in a
direct line between the door and the window.
The window! I said quickly.
You, too, have my first idea. I imagined that the chair was drawn out
so that something connected with the window should not be seen by any
one entering through the door. But I soon abandoned that supposition,
for though the chair was a grandfather with a high back, it obscured
very little of the window, only the part between the sash and the
ground. No, mon ami, but remember that just in front of the window
there stood a table with books and magazines upon it. Now that table
was completely hidden by the drawnout chair and immediately I had my
first shadowy suspicion of the truth.
Supposing that there had been something on that table not intended
to be seen? Something placed there by the murderer? As yet I had no
inkling of what that something might be. But I knew certain very
interesting facts about it. For instance, it was something that the
murderer had not been able to take away with him at the time that he
committed the crime. At the same time it was vital that it should be
removed as soon as possible after the crime had been discovered. And
so the telephone message, and the opportunity for the murderer to be on
the spot when the body was discovered.
Now four people were on the scene before the police arrived. Yourself,
Parker, Major Blunt, and Mr. Raymond. Parker I eliminated at once,
since at whatever time the crime was discovered, he was the one
person certain to be on the spot. Also it was he who told me of the
pulled out chair. Parker, then, was cleared of the murder, that is. I
still thought it possible that he had been blackmailing Mrs. Ferrars.
Raymond and Blunt, however, remained under suspicion since, if the
crime had been discovered in the early hours of the morning, it was
quite possible that they might have arrived on the scene too late to
prevent the object on the round table being discovered.
Now what was that object? You heard my arguments tonight in reference
to the scrap of conversation overheard? As soon as I learned that
a representative of a dictaphone company had called, the idea of a
dictaphone took root in my mind. You heard what I said in this room not
half an hour ago? They all agreed with my theory, but one vital fact
seems to have escaped them. Granted that a dictaphone was being used by
Mr. Ackroyd that night, why was no dictaphone found?
I never thought of that, I said.
We know that a dictaphone was supplied to Mr. Ackroyd. But no
dictaphone has been found amongst his effects. So, if something was
taken from that table, why should not that something be the dictaphone?
But there were certain difficulties in the way. The attention of every
one was, of course, focused on the murdered man. I think any one could
have gone to the table unnoticed by the other people in the room. But
a dictaphone has a certain bulk; it cannot be slipped casually into
a pocket. There must have been a receptacle of some kind capable of
holding it.
You see where I am arriving? The figure of the murderer is taking
shape. A person who was on the scene straightway, but who might not
have been if the crime had been discovered the following morning.
A person carrying a receptacle into which the dictaphone might be
fitted
I interrupted.
But why remove the dictaphone? What was the point?
You are like Mr. Raymond. You take it for granted that what was heard
at ninethirty was Mr. Ackroyds voice speaking into a dictaphone. But
consider this useful invention for a little minute. You dictate into
it, do you not? And at some later time a secretary or a typist turns it
on, and the voice speaks again.
You mean——I gasped.
Poirot nodded.
Yes, I mean that. At ninethirty Mr. Ackroyd was already dead. It
was the dictaphone speakingnot the man.
And the murderer switched it on. Then he must have been in the room at
that minute?
Possibly. But we must not exclude the likelihood of some mechanical
device having been applied, something after the nature of a time lock,
or even of a simple alarm clock. But in that case we must add two
qualifications to our imaginary portrait of the murderer. It must be
some one who knew of Mr. Ackroyds purchase of the dictaphone and also
some one with the necessary mechanical knowledge.
I had got thus far in my own mind when we came to the footprints on
the window ledge. Here there were three conclusions open to me. 1
They might really have been made by Ralph Paton. He had been at Fernly
that night, and might have climbed into the study and found his uncle
dead there. That was one hypothesis. 2 There was the possibility that
the footmarks might have been made by somebody else who happened to
have the same kind of studs in his shoes. But the inmates of the house
had shoes soled with crepe rubber, and I declined to believe in the
coincidence of some one from outside having the same kind of shoes as
Ralph Paton wore. Charles Kent, as we know from the barmaid of the Dog
and Whistle, had on a pair of boots clean dropping off him. 3 Those
prints were made by some one deliberately trying to throw suspicion
on Ralph Paton. To test this last conclusion, it was necessary to
ascertain certain facts. One pair of Ralphs shoes had been obtained
from the Three Boars by the police. Neither Ralph nor any one else
could have worn them that evening, since they were downstairs being
cleaned. According to the police theory, Ralph was wearing another pair
of the same kind, and I found out that it was true that he had two
pairs. Now for my theory to be proved correct it was necessary for the
murderer to have worn Ralphs shoes that evening, in which case Ralph
must have been wearing yet a third pair of footwear of some kind.
I could hardly suppose that he would bring three pairs of shoes all
alike; the third pair of footwear were more likely to be boots. I got
your sister to make inquiries on this point, laying some stress on the
color, in order, I admit it frankly, to obscure the real reason for my
asking.
You know the result of her investigations. Ralph Paton had had a
pair of boots with him. The first question I asked him when he came to
my house yesterday morning was what he was wearing on his feet on the
fatal night. He replied at once that he had worn boots; he was still
wearing them, in fact having nothing else to put on.
So we get a step further in our description of the murderer: a person
who had the opportunity to take these shoes of Ralph Paton's from the
Three Boars that day.
He paused, and then said, with a slightly raised voice:
There is one further point. The murderer must have been a person who
had the opportunity to purloin that dagger from the silver table. You
might argue that any one in the house might have done so, but I will
recall to you that Miss Ackroyd was very positive that the dagger was
not there when she examined the silver table.
He paused again.
Let us recapitulate now that all is clear. A person who was at the
Three Boars earlier that day, a person who knew Ackroyd well enough
to know that he had purchased a dictaphone, a person who was of a
mechanical turn of mind, who had the opportunity to take the dagger
from the silver table before Miss Flora arrived, who had with him a
receptacle suitable for hiding the dictaphone, such as a black bag, and
who had the study to himself for a few minutes after the crime was
discovered while Parker was telephoning for the police. In fact Dr.
Sheppard!
 CHAPTER XXVI
 AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
There was a dead silence for a minute and a half.
Then I laughed.
You're mad, I said.
No, said Poirot placidly. I am not mad. It was the little
discrepancy in time that first drew my attention to you right at the
beginning.
Discrepancy in time? I queried, puzzled.
But yes. You will remember that every one agreed, you yourself
included, that it took five minutes to walk from the lodge to the
house——less if you took the short cut to the terrace. But you left the
house at ten minutes to nine both by your own statement and that of
Parker, and yet it was nine oclock as you passed through the lodge
gates. It was a chilly night, not an evening a man would be inclined to
dawdle; why had you taken ten minutes to do a five minutes walk? All
along I realized that we had only your statement for it that the study
window was ever fastened. Ackroyd asked you if you had done so; he never
looked to see. Supposing, then, that the study window was unfastened?
Would there be time in that ten minutes for you to run round the
outside of the house, change your shoes, climb in through the window,
kill Ackroyd, and get to the gate by nine oclock? I decided against
that theory since in all probability a man as nervous as Ackroyd was
that night would hear you climbing in, and then there would have been
a struggle. But supposing that you killed Ackroyd before you left, as
you were standing beside his chair? Then you go out of the front door,
run round to the summerhouse, take Ralph Patons shoes out of the bag
you brought up with you that night, slip them on, walk through the
mud in them, and leave prints on the window ledge, you climb in, lock
the study door on the inside, run back to the summerhouse, change
back into your own shoes, and race down to the gate. I went through
similar actions the other day, when you were with Mrs. Ackroyd. It took
ten minutes exactly. Then home and an alibi since you had timed the
dictaphone for half past nine.
My dear Poirot, I said in a voice that sounded strange and forced to
my own ears, you've been brooding over this case too long. What on
earth had I to gain by murdering Ackroyd?
Safety. It was you who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars. Who could have had
a better knowledge of what killed Mr. Ferrars than the doctor who was
attending him? When you spoke to me that first day in the garden,
you mentioned a legacy received about a year ago. I have been unable
to discover any trace of a legacy. You had to invent some way of
accounting for Mrs. Ferrars's twenty thousand pounds. It has not done
you much good. You lost most of it in speculation, then you put the
screw on too hard, and Mrs. Ferrars took a way out that you had not
expected. If Ackroyd had learnt the truth he would have had no mercy on
you; you were ruined for ever.
And the telephone call? I asked, trying to rally. You have a
plausible explanation of that also, I suppose?
I will confess to you that it was my greatest stumbling block when
I found that a call had actually been put through to you from Kings
Abbot station. I at first believed that you had simply invented the
story. It was a very clever touch, that. You must have some excuse for
arriving at Fernly, finding the body, and so getting the chance to
remove the dictaphone on which your alibi depended. I had a very vague
notion of how it was worked when I came to see your sister that first
day and inquired as to what patients you had seen on Friday morning. I
had no thought of Miss Russell in my mind at that time. Her visit was a
lucky coincidence, since it distracted your mind from the real object
of my questions. I found what I was looking for. Among your patients
that morning was the steward of an American liner. Who more suitable
than he to be leaving for Liverpool by the train that evening? And
afterwards he would be on the high seas, well out of the way. I noted
that the Orion sailed on Saturday, and having obtained the name of
the steward I sent him a wireless message asking a certain question.
This is his reply you saw me receive just now.
He held out the message to me. It ran as follows:
Quite correct. Dr. Sheppard asked me to leave a note at a patient's
house. I was to ring him up from the station with the reply. Reply was
No answer.
It was a clever idea, said Poirot. The call was genuine. Your sister
saw you take it. But there was only one man's word as to what was
actually said: your own!